                                          Training for the Model You Return: Improving Optimization for
                                                         Iterate-Averaged Language Models∗
                                                                              Kwok Chun Au1 and Adam Block1,2
                                                                    1
                                                                    Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
                                                               2
                                                                   Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University
arXiv:2606.25086v2 [cs.LG] 30 Jun 2026




                                                                                               Abstract
                                                       Many modern Language Model (LM) pipelines return an averaged model, such as an expo-
                                                   nential moving average of the training iterates, rather than the final iterate itself. This raises a
                                                   fundamental question: given that we will return an iterate average, how should we change train-
                                                   ing to improve the performance of this average? We study this question by formulating optimizer
                                                   design for the iterate-average estimator as an optimal-control problem. In a continuous-time
                                                   stochastic quadratic model, we solve for the control strategy that minimizes the error of the
                                                   returned average subject to a penalty on the size of the intervention. A practical approximation
                                                   to this controller yields PACE, a lightweight wrapper around AdamW that pulls the live weights
                                                   toward their exponential moving average with a clipped, per-coordinate control strength. We
                                                   prove that a stylized version of PACE converges at the standard stochastic convex optimization
                                                   rate, up to a factor depending on the averaging rule, while in the quadratic setting it can strictly
                                                   improve the limiting squared error of the iterate-average estimator and can do so by an arbi-
                                                   trarily large factor on some instances. Empirically, our results suggest that PACE improves over
                                                   AdamW and EMA-evaluated AdamW in supervised fine-tuning of 1-2B parameter LMs and in
                                                   GPT-2 pretraining on FineWeb for a wide range of learning rates, decay schedules, and other
                                                   hyperparameters.


                                         1        Introduction
                                         Inspired by the classical theory of stochastic convex optimization [30, 32], many Language Model
                                         (LM) pipelines use some form of model averaging, such as an exponential moving average (EMA)
                                         of training iterates, to stabilize optimization and improve the performance of the returned model
                                         [1, 3, 5, 7, 15, 17, 21, 27, 38]. A vast body of work has been devoted to understanding LM training,
                                         but the ubiquity of iterate averaging in practice raises a fundamental question: given that an averaged
                                         LM will be returned, how should we change training to improve the performance of this average?
                                             While prior work has implicitly addressed this question by observing that iterate averaging
                                         can allow for more aggressive training through higher learning rates or more limited learning rate
                                         decay [3, 5, 9], in this work, we take a direct approach by asking whether we can design a simple
                                         modification to the base optimization algorithm that explicitly controls the training trajectory to
                                         improve the performance of the iterate-average estimator. Our starting point is to follow Block and
                                         Zhang [3] and observe that once we commit to returning an average of the training trajectory, the
                                         optimization algorithm is no longer just producing a final iterate, but rather a statistic of the entire
                                             ∗
                                                 The code used to run our evaluations can be found at https://github.com/leonou2010/pace-optimizer.


                                                                                                    1
                              SmolLM2-1.7B                                           Qwen3-1.7B                                         Gemma3-1B
            0.80
                                                    AdamW                                                         1.3
                                                               1.1
            0.78                                    EMA
                                                    PACE
                                                                                                                  1.2
            0.76                                               1.0
 Val Loss




                                                                                                                  1.1
            0.74
                                                               0.9

            0.72                                                                                                  1.0
                                                               0.8
            0.70
                                                                                                                  0.9

                   0   250   500   750   1000 1250 1500 1750         0   250   500    750   1000 1250 1500 1750         0   250   500    750   1000 1250 1500 1750
                                    Step                                                Step                                              Step




Figure 1: Performance of PACE on fine-tuning. Validation cross-entropy on smol-smoltalk
for SmolLM2-1.7B (left), Qwen3-1.7B (middle), and Gemma3-1B (right). For each model, PACE
uses a constant learning rate, while the AdamW and EMA baselines use their best learning-rate-
decay schedule (cosine or WSD). PACE strictly improves on both baselines on all three models; see
Figure 17 for a three-seed robustness study.


trajectory: we may thus rephrase our key question by asking how we can best modify the training
trajectory so as to make the returned model average maximally close to the optimum.
    To answer this question, we take a principled approach to algorithm design by deriving a new
optimization algorithm from an optimal-control formulation of a stochastic quadratic optimization
problem. Indeed, while LM training is obviously not quadratic, many recent works have derived
practically effective optimization interventions by designing algorithms in analytically tractable
settings such as convex, quadratic, or linear problems [3, 10, 13, 36, 43]. In particular, our deriva-
tion begins in a deliberately simplified setting: continuous-time stochastic gradient descent on a
quadratic objective with additive noise, where the ‘modification’ is realized as an additive control.
In this model, the uncontrolled dynamics reduce to the familiar Ornstein–Uhlenbeck approximation
of noisy gradient descent near a quadratic minimum [3, 19, 26]. We then add a control input to
the dynamics and choose this input to minimize the squared error of the returned iterate average,
subject to a quadratic penalty on the size of the intervention. This gives a linear-quadratic stochas-
tic control problem [12, 20, 41]. Solving this problem yields an optimal controller with a natural
interpretation: the algorithm should pull the live iterate toward an estimate of the optimum and
toward consistency with the accumulated average of the trajectory.
    The exact optimal controller is not directly implementable in modern LM training because it
depends on quantities unknown to the learner. We therefore turn the controller into a practical
algorithm through a sequence of heuristic approximations. We call the resulting method PACE
(Algorithm 1), a lightweight wrapper around AdamW [24] that pays an additional memory cost
of model weights in order to better stabilize the training process. Because PACE is derived in
such a simplified setting, it is not a priori obvious whether the resulting algorithm has any concrete
theoretical guarantees. We show that a stylized version of the algorithm has convergence guarantees
for general convex losses with unbiased stochastic gradients:
Theorem 1 (Informal version of Theorem 3). For any convex loss with unbiased stochastic gradients,
the iterate-average estimator returned by PACE converges to the minimum at the standard stochastic
convex optimization rate, up to a factor depending on the strength of the EMA.
   In essence, Theorem 1 shows that our proposed method is never much worse than SGD for
convex objectives, even when the quadratic assumption used in the derivation is dropped. We

                                                                                       2
then show that, in the quadratic setting from which the algorithm was derived, the controlled
dynamics can strictly improve the limiting squared error of the iterate-average estimator relative to
the uncontrolled dynamics, and that this improvement can be arbitrarily large on certain quadratic
instances:

Proposition 1 (Informal version of Propositions 2 and 3). In the quadratic setting from which PACE
is derived, the optimal control strategy can strictly improve the limiting squared error of the iterate-
average estimator relative to the uncontrolled dynamics, and this improvement can be arbitrarily
large on certain quadratic instances.

    To summarize, in theory, PACE is never that much worse than SGD for convex objectives, but
can be much better when the objective is locally quadratic.
    We complement our theory with experiments on LM fine-tuning and pretraining, results of
the former of which can be seen in Figure 1. In particular, across three different models of size
between 1B and 2B parameters, we find that PACE strictly improves over both AdamW and an
EMA thereof. In Section 4, we present a more detailed analysis of the performance of PACE across
a range of hyperparameters as well as explore the efficacy of PACE on a small pretraining setup at
the Chinchilla-optimal token budget [14]. We find that PACE is competitive with the Schedule-Free
algorithm of Defazio et al. [9], which also uses iterate averaging to stabilize training and remove
the need for learning rate decay and that PACE remains competitive with AdamW even when the
latter is allowed to decay the learning rate to zero, suggesting that PACE can stabilize training in a
regime that is not subject to learning rate decay.

Related work. We now briefly discuss some of the key related works, before moving on to the
formal problem setup, algorithm derivation, and rigorous convergence guarantees in Section 2.

Iterate averaging in deep learning. Originally introduced from the theory of stochastic convex
optimization [30, 32], iterate averaging has been shown to be a powerful tool for stabilizing opti-
mization and improving generalization in deep learning [3, 5, 7, 15, 17]. Many approaches have been
proposed, including stochastic weight averaging [15], exponential moving averages, and even more
complex schemes like model soups [38] and virtually all modern open-source LMs used some form
of iterate averaging [1, 21, 27]. As in our work, there has been much literature on using continuous-
time analysis to understand the behavior of iterate averaging in deep learning [5, 7, 25, 26], with
Block and Zhang [3] being the most directly relevant to the present paper. Unlike that work, which
uses continuous-time analysis in a noisy quadratic model to propose a new averaging scheme, here
we commit to the standard exponential moving average and instead use continuous-time analysis
to design a new optimization algorithm that explicitly controls the training trajectory to improve
the performance of this standard averaging scheme.

Comparison to similar optimizers. Several authors have proposed analyzing optimization
through the lens of control theory [8, 22, 39], although the former primarily investigates convergence
bounds of existing optimizers and the latter two use the Kalman filter to derive an optimization
intervention that, while interesting, does not appear to scale to LMs of modern size. With regard to
the final algorithm, several prior optimizers have similar update rules. Pagliardini et al. [28], Zhang
et al. [44] also consider averaging during training (instead of in an offline, post-hoc manner). The
former applies averaging to gradients as opposed to iterates and can be thought of as a more sophis-
ticated version of momentum, whereas the latter has a very different update rule from PACE and is
intended to solve communication bottlenecks in distributed training. The authors of Zhang et al.


                                                   3
[43] propose a method that takes gradient steps and periodically transports the live weights toward a
slow-moving EMA; our approach recovers a similar update when the pullback value is large, although
empirically we find that PACE improves performance with intermediate pullback values, improving
on that prior work. Of greatest relevance is the schedule-free (SF) update proposed by Defazio
et al. [9], which also uses iterate averaging to stabilize training and remove the need for learning
rate decay, although that work proposes a different algorithm. Our method is competitive with
SF empirically, although pays for improved theoretical convergence in the quadratic setting with a
slower theoretical guarantee in the general convex setting. Moreover, our naïve implementation of
PACE uses an additional memory cost of model weights, as we incorporate momentum.

Notation. We use lowercase letters to denote scalars and uppercase bold letters to denote matri-
ces. We always denote the standard Brownian motion in Rd by Wt and ∥·∥ refers to the euclidean
norm. We use diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) to denote the diagonal matrix with entries α1 , . . . , αd on the diag-
onal. For vector functions depending on time, we use a subscript to denote the time dependence
(e.g. θt ), unless we are concerned with a single coordinate, in which case we use parentheses (e.g.
θi (t)).


2     Algorithm Derivation and Guarantees
In this section, we formally introduce the problem in which we are interested as well as derive a
rigorous solution in a simplified setting. We then demonstrate that a simple, heuristic approximation
to this solution has convergence guarantees for convex problems and provably outperforms standard
SGD in the quadratic setting.

2.1    Formal Problem Setup
Formally, we are interested in stochastic optimization, where for some loss function F : Rd → R
with minimum µ⋆ = argminθ F (θ), we wish to return some θb that is close to µ⋆ . As is standard
in the stochastic optimization literature [5, 9, 24, 30, 32], we will assume only that we have noisy
gradient access to F , i.e., for any θ ∈ Rd , we can sample some g such that E[g] = ∇F (θ).
    Our starting point is to recall the following empirical observation about the behavior of language
model training: iterate averaging schemes like EMA and BEMA are extraordinarily effective at
improving the performance of LMs, both through stabilizing the optimization and through improving
generalization [15, 17, 27]. While there has been a large body of work dedicated to understanding
and improving such iterate averaging schemes, we instead focus on the question of how to improve
training algorithms under the assumption that we will be returning an iterate average. In particular,
we ask the following fundamental question:
         Given that we will return an iterate average after training, how should we modify
      optimization algorithms to minimize the loss of the returned weights?
We will answer this question theoretically in a simplified setting, and empirically by training large
language models with modern optimization algorithms. In theory, following a long line of work in
optimization for deep learning, we will derive an answer to this question by considering a quadratic
model [3, 5, 7, 10, 13, 43], and then prove convergence guarantees for our algorithm in a more general
convex setting. In particular, for our derivation, we will make the following four assumptions. First,
the loss function F is a quadratic function of the form
                                              1
                                    F (θ) =     (θ − µ⋆ )⊤ A (θ − µ⋆ ) ,
                                              2

                                                     4
for a diagonal positive definite matrix A (for the general, non-diagonal case, see Section E). Second,
in order to further simplify the analysis, we will follow prior work [3–5, 25, 26] and consider a
continuous time limit of the optimization process, where the dynamics of the parameters θt are
given by a stochastic differential equation (SDE). Third, we will assume that we are returning a
simple time average of the iterates, as opposed to more sophisticated schemes like EMA and BEMA.
Fourth, we will consider a Bayesian setting, where µ⋆ is a random variable with a known prior
distribution. Finally, we will focus on the case of vanilla SGD with stationary, homoscedastic noise,
i.e. the noise covariance Σ is constant and does not depend on θt . We will model the modification
to the base optimization algorithm as a control input ut that can be added to the dynamics of θt ,
affecting the trajectory of the optimization process. Combining these assumptions, we thus return
θbEMA,T :
                                   Z T
                             1
                   θbEMA,T =             θt dt where dθt = [A (µ⋆ − θt ) + ut ] dt + Σ1/2 dWt ,                      (1)
                             T      0

and Wt a standard Brownian motion in Rd [19, 41]. Critically, we wish θbEMA,T to be a good estimator
of µ⋆ while exerting as little control effort as possible; one way to formalize this desideratum is to
seek a control strategy ut that minimizes the following objective:
                                                              Z T         
                                                       2
                                                     ⋆                  2
                           JT (u) = E θEMA,T − µ
                                          b              +λ·       ∥ut ∥ dt ,                      (2)
                                                                           0

where λ > 0 is a regularization parameter that controls the tradeoff between the quality of the
returned estimator θbEMA,T and how far from the base optimization algorithm the control strategy
ut is allowed to deviate. We will refer to the problem of minimizing JT (u) over all progressively
measurable control strategies ut as the optimal control problem for the iterate-average estimator.
Note that in the case that ut = 0 for all t, (1) reduces to the well-known Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
[19, 26], and we recover the setting considered in Block and Zhang [3].

2.2    Derivation of the Optimal Control Strategy
We now present the optimal control solution for the iterate-average estimator.

Theorem 2. Suppose that µ⋆ is drawn from a known prior distribution and θt evolves according
to (1) for some control strategy ut 1 and that A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is a diagonal positive definite
matrix. Let µbt = E [µ⋆ |θs , s ≤ t]. Then the optimal control strategy ut that minimizes the objective
JT (u) defined in (2) is given for each coordinate i ∈ {1, . . . , d} by
                                                            2
                                          1 − e−αi (T −t)
       u⋆i (t) =                                                     −2α (T −t)
                                                                                   µi (t) − θi (t))
                                                                                  (b                                 (3)
                   αi2 λT 2 + T − t − 2/αi (1 − e−αi (T −t) ) + 1−e 2αii
                                          αi (1 − e−αi (T −t) )
                                                                                                Z t           
                   +                                                   −2αi (T −t)
                                                                                    t · µ
                                                                                        bi (t) −     θ i (s)ds   .
                       αi2 λT 2 + T − t − 2/αi (1 − e−αi (T −t) ) + 1−e 2αi                           0


    We defer a complete proof of this result to Section E, as well as generalizing beyond the diagonal
A setting. After some algebra and augmenting the state, the analysis rests on classical results from
the theory of linear quadratic stochastic control [12, 20] including solving the Riccati equation and
   1
    Formally, we assume ut is progressively measurable, i.e. can only include information from observations up to
time t.


                                                                 5
applying the principle of certainty equivalence. While (3) is attractive in that it is a closed-form
expression for the optimal control strategy, it is not easily implementable in practice, as it depends
on µbt , the posterior mean of µ⋆ given the trajectory of θs up to time t. Even in the case of a
Gaussian prior, which would imply that µ   bt is given by a Kalman filter [12, 19, 41], the resulting
control strategy would be difficult to implement in practice, especially at the scale of language
models. Thus, we simplify (3) to obtain a more practical control strategy by making the following
approximations: (i) we replace µbt ≈ θbEMA,t and (ii) we suppose that t ≪ T . The first assumption is
connected with the fundamental motivation of our work: we wish to return θbEMA,T as an estimate
of µ⋆ at the end of training, so it is natural to use θbEMA,t as an estimate of µ⋆ at time t. The
second assumption is motivated primarily by a desire for simplicity and the observation that the
optimal control strategy is most impactful in the early stages of training, when the optimization
trajectory is far from the optimum and thus there is more room for improvement. Assuming T ≫ 1,
we approximate T − t ≈ T and exp(−αi (T − t)) ≈ 0. With these approximations, we obtain the
following practical control:
                                                     −1              
                               ut = T −1 I + λA2 T         θbEMA,t − θt .                          (4)

    While (4) is a valid approximation to the optimal control strategy, it is not yet ready for imple-
mentation, as it remains in continuous time. Furthermore, the modification to the base optimization
algorithm is a function of A, which is unknown in practice. Moreover, practical iterate averaging
schemes in deep learning tend to use exponential instead of uniform weighting. We thus discretize
(4) and replace A with a diagonal matrix C to arrive at the following update strategy: given current
parameters θk at iteration k, stochastic gradient gk , and learning rate η, parameters are updated
according to
                                             
          θk+1 = θk − η · gk + C θbEMA,k − θk , θbEMA,k+1 = (1 − β) · θbEMA,k + β · θk+1 ,         (5)

where β is the averaging parameter. Thus we are left with (5), which is a simple modification to
the base optimization algorithm that can be implemented with minimal computational overhead.
Indeed, C is a diagonal matrix and thus the matmul can be accomplished coordinate wise, at
roughly the same cost as the preconditioning step in Adam or AdamW [18, 24]. While there still
exist several additional tweaks to (5) required to make it work well in practice (Section 3), we have
now derived a simple, practical modification to the base optimization algorithm that is motivated
by the optimal control solution to the iterate-average estimator in a simplified setting.

2.3   Convergence Guarantee in the Convex Setting
We derived (5) above as a practical approximation to the optimal control strategy for the iterate-
average estimator in a simplified setting through heuristics: while we provided a rigorous derivation
of the optimal control strategy in the quadratic setting, we then made use of several approximations
and discretization in order to arrive at the update rule. In this section we provide formal guarantees
for this update. We first show that for arbitrary convex loss functions, the iterate-average estimator
returned by (5) converges at the same rate as SGD, up to a constant factor depending on C and β.

Theorem 3. Suppose that F : Rd → R is a convex, G-Lipschitz function and suppose for each k
we have access to a stochastic gradient gk such that E[gk ] = ∇F (θk ) and E[∥gk − ∇F (θk )∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 .
Suppose that θk evolves according
                          PT −1 to (5) for some diagonal matrix C with entries in [0, 1] and some
β ∈ (0, 1). Let θT = T −1
                           k=0 θk be the flat average. Then it holds that for optimally tuned learning



                                                  6
Algorithm 1 PACE: Pullback Averaging Control for Efficient Optimization
Require: Learning rate η, pullback strength c, EMA power κ, scale ε, update frequency uf.
    bEMA,0 ← θ0
 1: θ
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:    θt ← AdamW.step(θt−1 ; η) and v̂t ← AdamW.preconditioner(θt′ ).
 4:    if t mod uf = 0 then
           λt,i ← min η c (1 + t)−κ /( v̂t,i + ε), 1
                                       p             
 5:                                                            ▷ Clipped per-coordinate pullback gain
 6:        θt ← θt + λt ⊙ (θt−1EMA − θ     )
                                       t−1
 7:        θbEMA,t ← (1 − βt ) θbEMA,t−1 + βt θt , βt = (1 + t)−κ                     ▷ EMA update
 8:    end if
 9: end for
10: return θ bEMA,T


rate η,
                                               √                        r
                                                   2−β                      G2 + σ 2
                       E F (θT ) − F (µ⋆ ) ≤           · ∥θ1 − µ⋆ ∥ ·
                                         
                                                                                     .
                                                    β                          T
    The proof of Theorem 3 is given in Section F and follows by a standard analysis of SGD coupled
with a recursive analysis to ensure that the update does not drift too far away from SGD itself. In
particular,
      √     Theorem 3 ensures that the iterate-average estimator returned by (5) enjoys the same
O(1/ T ) and is worse only by a multiplicative factor depending on the strength of the EMA update.
Unfortunately, this issue is intrinsic to the analysis and likely cannot be improved without additional
assumptions.
    While the previous result shows that (5) is never that much worse than SGD for convex functions,
in the special case of quadratics, it can be quite a lot better. As stated above, locally approximating
the loss function of a LM by a quadratic is a common heuristic in optimization for deep learning
[3, 5, 42, 43], where the Hessian of the loss is used as a proxy for local curvature. In this setting,
we show that (5) enjoys improved convergence compared to SGD.

Proposition 2. Suppose that F (θ) = 1/2(θ − µ⋆ )⊤ A(θ − µ⋆ ) for some diagonal positive definite
matrix A and that θk evolves according to (5) for some diagonal matrix C with entries in [0, 1] and
some β ∈ (0, 1). Suppose further that the stochastic gradients are given by gk = A(θk − µ⋆ ) + ξk ,
where ξk is a zero-mean noise term with covariance σ 2 I. Then for any  h learning rate iη such that
∥ηA∥op < 1 and choice of β, there is some C such that limT →∞ E ∥θbEMA,T − µ⋆ ∥2 is strictly
smaller than the limiting squared error of the iterate-average estimator returned by SGD.

    The proof of Proposition 2 is given in Section F and demonstrates that (5) can rigorously improve
the convergence of the iterate-average estimator in the quadratic setting. Finally, we show that the
improvement over SGD can be arbitrarily large for certain choices of C and β for some problems.

Proposition 3. For any ε > 0, there is some quadratic problem and some choice of C and β such
that the limiting squared error of the iterate-average estimator returned by (5) is at least a factor of
ε smaller than the limiting squared error of the iterate-average estimator returned by SGD.




                                                     7
                                Constant LR                                      EMA Power = 0.5                                             WSD
               4.0                                       3.80
                                                 AdamW                    AdamW                                       3.70
                                                 EMA                      lr = 1.5e-3
               3.9                                       3.75
                                                 PACE                     lr = 2e-3
                                                                                                                      3.65
                                                                          lr = 2.5e-3
                                                         3.70             lr = 3e-3
    Val Loss




               3.8
                                                                                                                      3.60
                                                         3.65
               3.7
                                                                                                                      3.55
                                                         3.60
               3.6
                                                                                                                      3.50
                                                         3.55

                     0   1000    2000     3000   4000                                                                   2000   2500   3000    3500   4000   4500




                                                              W


                                                                      A

                                                                            -3

                                                                                  -3

                                                                                         -3

                                                                                               -3

                                                                                                     -3

                                                                                                           -2

                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                  M

                                                                          1e

                                                                                 2e

                                                                                        3e

                                                                                              5e

                                                                                                    7e

                                                                                                          1e

                                                                                                                3e
                                                             m

                                                                  E
                                                         da
                                                         A
                                   Step                                        Pullback strength c                                           Step



Figure 2: Performance of PACE on pretraining of GPT-2 (124M) on FineWeb at the Chinchilla-
optimal token budget. Left: validation cross-entropy trajectories at a constant learning rate, with
EMA and PACE at the same EMA power (κ = 0.5) so that they differ only in the pullback. Mid-
dle: effect of pullback strength c on validation cross-entropy at κ = 0.5. Right: the analogous
comparison under WSD, using linear learning rate decay to zero over the last 20% of steps. PACE
outperforms both the AdamW and EMA baselines under each schedule.


3               Introducing PACE: Pullback Averaging Control for Efficient Op-
                timization
While we derived a simple modification to the base optimization algorithm in (5), several additional
tweaks make the proposed method work in practice. The first key modification is that we will
replace the SGD update with an AdamW update [24], which is a standard optimizer choice for
language models; in particular, we will use both momentum and preconditioning in the vanilla
optimizer step. The second question is how to choose the matrix C that preconditions the pullback
toward the iterate average. According to the theory in (4), the optimal choice of C scales inversely
with A and T . While in practice language models are obviously not quadratic, locally they can be
approximated thereby, with A corresponding to the Hessian [42, 43]; following the standard noisy-
quadratic-model identification of Adam’s second-moment estimate vt as a Hessian-diagonal proxy,
we will thus set C to be a diagonal matrix with entries given by the Adam preconditioner [18].
One point where our empirical implementation deviates from the theory is that the latter suggests
preconditioning should be scale like 1/vt , but for stability reasons we find that the standard Adam
preconditioner of 1/√vt +ε works better in practice.
    Following standard praxis in deep learning, in order to account for the nonstationarity of the
optimization landscape, we replace a fixed β in the EMA with a decaying βt = (1 + t)−κ , where
κ ∈ (0, 1) is a hyperparameter [3, 5, 7, 17]; in effect this makes the iterate average more responsive
to recent iterates, with κ = 1 recovering uniform averaging. For the same reason, we replace the
T −1 scaling in (4) with a slower decaying factor that allows the pullback to remain significant even
late in training. We incorporate clipping to ensure that our updates are always convex combinations
of the iterate averaged point and the naïve optimizer update step. The resulting control becomes
                                                                         
                           ut = min (1 + t)−κ · ηc/(√vt +ε), 1 θbEMA,t − θt ,                      (6)

where the operations are applied coordinate-wise, η is the learning rate, c ≥ 0 is a single scalar
setting the controller strength, and vt is the Adam second-moment estimate. Note that in the limit
as c ↑ ∞, we recover the Lookahead optimizer with an inner loop of a single step [43], while at

                                                                                        8
                                    Frequency = 1                                                 Frequency = 5                                                Frequency = 10
            1.325                                                                                                                      1.325
                                                            lr = 1.5e-3   1.32                                             lr = 2e-3                                                    lr = 3e-3
            1.300                                                         1.30                                                         1.300

            1.275                                                         1.28                                                         1.275
 Val Loss




                                                                          1.26
            1.250                                                                                                                      1.250
                                                                          1.24
            1.225                                                                                                                      1.225
                                                                          1.22
            1.200                                                                                                                      1.200
                                                                          1.20
            1.175                                                         1.18                                                         1.175

            1.150                                                         1.16                                                         1.150
                 W


                         A

                              -4

                                     -3

                                           -3

                                                 -2

                                                       -2

                                                             -1

                                                                   -1




                                                                               W


                                                                                       A

                                                                                            -4

                                                                                                   -3

                                                                                                         -3

                                                                                                               -2

                                                                                                                     -2

                                                                                                                           -1

                                                                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                            W


                                                                                                                                                    A

                                                                                                                                                         -4

                                                                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                                                                      -3

                                                                                                                                                                            -2

                                                                                                                                                                                  -2

                                                                                                                                                                                        -1

                                                                                                                                                                                              -1
                     M




                                                                                   M




                                                                                                                                                M
                             1e

                                   1e

                                          3e

                                                1e

                                                      3e

                                                            1e

                                                                  3e




                                                                                           1e

                                                                                                 1e

                                                                                                        3e

                                                                                                              1e

                                                                                                                    3e

                                                                                                                          1e

                                                                                                                                3e




                                                                                                                                                        1e

                                                                                                                                                              1e

                                                                                                                                                                     3e

                                                                                                                                                                           1e

                                                                                                                                                                                 3e

                                                                                                                                                                                       1e

                                                                                                                                                                                             3e
                m




                                                                              m




                                                                                                                                           m
                     E




                                                                                   E




                                                                                                                                                E
             da




                                                                          da




                                                                                                                                        da
            A




                                                                          A




                                                                                                                                       A
                                  Pullback strength c                                           Pullback strength c                                          Pullback strength c



Figure 3: Effect of update frequency and pullback strength. Validation cross-entropy of
SmolLM2-135M for different learning rates, pullback strengths, and update frequencies with κ=0.3.
Optimal pullback strength remains relatively robust to learning rate and update frequency, with
improvement over the EMA baseline across a wide range of settings.


c = 0, we recover AdamW with EMA. Finally, we allow for the update to only occur at a specified
frequency, uf, as is common in practical implementations of EMA. The result, PACE, is detailed in
Algorithm 1.

Implementation Concerns. In practice, there are two concerns with implementing PACE at
scale. First, we have introduced a new tuning parameter c that controls the strength of the pullback
toward the iterate average, as well as the update frequency uf; on the other hand, the update
frequency is already a parameter in standard implementations of EMA, and our experiments suggest
that the optimal pullback strength is relatively robust and transfers across hyperparameters like
learning rate (cf. Figure 3). Second, and perhaps more importantly, PACE requires maintaining
an additional copy of model weights during training, which is a nontrivial memory overhead. One
mitigating factor is that this additional pressure is less relevant at large scale due to the use of large
batch sizes, but exploring further mitigations of the memory overhead of PACE is an important
direction for future work.


4               Empirical Investigation of PACE
Our proposed algorithm, PACE, was derived in a simplified quadratic model and it is thus not a
priori clear that it will be effective in practice on the non-convex, non-quadratic problems that
arise in language model training. In this section, we empirically evaluate PACE on two standard
language-modeling regimes: supervised fine-tuning of openweight 1–2B-parameter language models,
and from-scratch pretraining of a 124M-parameter model at the Chinchilla-optimal token budget.
    Our experiments are primarily organized around three questions: (i) does PACE improve on
vanilla AdamW and an EMA thereof across model families and learning rates? (ii) is the improve-
ment robust to the optimizer’s three new hyperparameters (pullback strength c, EMA power κ, and
update frequency uf)? and (iii) how does PACE compare to alternative baselines like learning rate
decay and Schedule-Free [9]? Further ablations are deferred to Section A.




                                                                                                        9
                                             EMA Power = 0.2                                         EMA Power = 0.5                                         EMA Power = 0.7
                            1.0                                                     1.0                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.005
  Fraction λ clipped at 1

                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.05
                            0.8                                                     0.8                                                     0.8                                        c = 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.5


                            0.6                                                     0.6                                                     0.6


                            0.4                                                     0.4                                                     0.4


                            0.2                                                     0.2                                                     0.2


                            0.0                                                     0.0                                                     0.0
                                  0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750
                                                    Step                                                    Step                                                    Step




Figure 4: Fraction of clipped updates throughout fine-tuning of SmolLM2-1.7B at a fixed
learning rate of η = 3×10−4 for different pullback strengths c and EMA powers κ. For large c
and small κ, a substantial fraction of coordinates are clipped at 1 throughout training, meaning
that the pullback fully transports those coordinates to the EMA point, especially early in training.


4.1                               Empirical Setup
For post-training, we finetune three pre-trained language models of similar scale, SmolLM2-1.7B
[1], Qwen3-1.7B [40], and Gemma3-1B [11], on the smol-smoltalk dataset [2] for one epoch
on the training split, plus a small-model dense ablation on SmolLM2-135M. For pretraining, we
train GPT-2 (124M) [31] on FineWeb [29] at the Chinchilla-optimal token budget of 2.5B tokens
[14]. Fine-tuning runs use a single NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 GPU; the GPT-2 pretraining sweep
runs on a Google Cloud TPU v6e (Trillium) pod, with training hyperparameters and resource costs
summarized in and around Table 1 of Section A. We report final validation cross-entropy on a held-
out smol-smoltalk split for fine-tuning and on a fixed FineWeb evaluation shard for pretraining.

4.2                               Main Results
In Figure 1, we show the training curves of PACE, EMA, and vanilla AdamW on the fine-tuning task
outlined above. We see that PACE substantially improves on EMA at the same per-model learning
rate. Note that the comparison to AdamW without EMA is also included as an illustration. In
Figure 2, we show the same comparison for the pretraining regime, where we again see a clear im-
provement of PACE over EMA. In Figure 10 (deferred to the appendix), we repeat these experiments
for Qwen on the Tulu dataset [21], with similar results. In all cases, we compare the best configu-
rations of EMA and vanilla training to PACE, where we swept across learning rate, decay schedule,
EMA power κ, and pullback strength c to find the best configuration for each baseline. Thus,
these results suggest that PACE can significantly improve on the performance of the iterate-average
estimator in practice, and that this improvement is robust across model families and datasets.

4.3                               Further Empirical Results
In addition to our main results, we also conduct a number of ablations and further experiments to
better understand the behavior of PACE and its sensitivity to its hyperparameters. While many
results are deferred to Section A in the interest of space, we briefly summarize some of the key
findings.




                                                                                                          10
Effect of pullback strength c, EMA power κ, and update frequency. In each of our
settings, we conduct a dense sweep over the pullback strength c and EMA power κ hyperparameters
of PACE for several learning rates and update frequencies in order to understand the sensitivity of
PACE to these hyperparameters and to verify that the improvement over EMA-evaluated AdamW
is robust. An example from our fine-tuning experiments is shown in Figure 3, which is broadly
replicated across models and settings (Figures 6 and 8). In particular, we see that relatively small
values of c (e.g. c = 3 × 10−3 ) can substantially improve on EMA-evaluated AdamW, and that the
improvement is robust across a range of learning rates and update frequencies.

Effect of clipping λ. In (6) and Algorithm 1, we clip the pullback gain λ to ensure that the
update is always a convex combination of the iterate average and the naïve optimizer step. When the
clipping is instantiated, PACE transports the relevant coordinate of the current iterate θk to exactly
equal that of the EMA point θbEMA,k , recovering a special case of Lookahead [43]. In Fig. 4, we show
how the fraction of clipped coordinates varies with different hyperparameters throughout training
on SmolLM2-1.7B at η = 3×10−4 , observing that in extreme cases, essentially all coordinates are
clipped (especially early in training), but generally clipping is not enforced for most coordinates.
Further results are in Figs. 12 and 13.

Effect of LR Decay. While our theory assumed constant learning rate, decay schedules are a
standard part of practical training pipelines. We experiment with three decay schedules: (i) constant
learning rate, (ii) linear decay to zero over the last 20% of steps, and (iii) cosine decay to zero. In
Figure 2 (right) we compare PACE to AdamW with linear decay to zero over the last 20% of steps
in pretraining, finding that PACE strictly improves even in this setting. Exhaustive results for all
three schedules can be found in Sections A and B.1; in summary, PACE provides improvement over
the baseline across all schedules, and the improvement is robust to the choice of schedule.

Comparing to the schedule-free baseline. We also compare PACE to the most prominent
schedule-free optimizer (SF) [9], which also uses iterate averaging to stabilize training and remove the
need for learning rate decay. In Figure 5, we compare PACE to Schedule-Free and observe competitive
performance. While Schedule-Free requires one fewer copy of model weights than our naïve PACE
implementation, it must switch between ‘fast’ and ‘slow’ moving iterate averages during training,
leading to slower training (12 vs 10 hours on a v6e TPU for Qwen3-1.7B in our experiments).
Finally, in Figure 5 (right), we show that PACE applied with a constant learning rate outperforms
AdamW with WSD at every token budget, suggesting that PACE can be an effective alternative to
learning rate decay. Similar results hold for pretraining, as shown in Figure 20, providing further
evidence that PACE can be an effective alternative to learning rate decay, although we emphasize
that improved performance is typically achieved by combining PACE with a decay schedule.




                                                  11
                                  SmolLM2-135M                                                   Qwen3-1.7B                                   SmolLM2-135M (WSD)
               1.45
                                                                          0.90                                                                                    PACE (constant)
                                                            AdamW                                              PACE                 1.6                           AdamW WSD 50%
               1.40                                         EMA                                                Schedule-Free                                      AdamW WSD 75%
                                                                                                                                                                  AdamW WSD 100%
               1.35                                                       0.85                                                      1.5
    Val Loss




               1.30
                                                                          0.80                                                      1.4
               1.25

               1.20
                                                                          0.75                                                      1.3
               1.15

               1.10                                                       0.70                                                      1.2

               1.05
                      0   500   1000   1500   2000   2500   3000   3500          0   250   500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0   20      40     60       80        100
                                         Step                                                       Step                                           Token budget (%)




Figure 5: Comparison of PACE to Schedule-Free [9], AdamW, and EMA on fine-tuning.
Validation cross-entropy on smol-smoltalk for SmolLM2-135M (left), Qwen3-1.7B (middle), and
a token-budget comparison on SmolLM2-135M (right): AdamW with WSD decays the learning
rate to zero over the last 20% of token budgets of 50%/75%/100% of the run, while PACE trains
at a constant learning rate over the full budget. PACE improves on AdamW and EMA-only and
is competitive with Schedule-Free; in the right panel, every WSD branch ends above the PACE
trajectory at every budget.


5                Discussion
In this work, we introduced PACE, a simple modification to existing LM optimization algorithms,
formally derived in an optimal control formulation, that explicitly controls the training trajectory to
improve the performance of the iterate-average estimator. We then showed empirically that PACE
can improve training performance in both pre- and post-training settings.

Limitations. A theoretical limitation is the restrictiveness of the assumptions under which PACE
was derived. This is partly mitigated by the convergence guarantee in the convex setting, but rig-
orously incorporating momentum and adaptive preconditioning into the analysis of the optimizer is
an important direction for future work. We emphasize that in all experiments, PACE is implemented
with both momentum and adaptive preconditioning. There are several empirical limitations of
the work as well. First, due to resource constraints, we were unable to verify the efficacy of PACE
at model scales larger than 2B parameters for post-training and 124M parameters for pretraining.
Second, PACE requires maintaining an additional copy of model weights during training and a more
detailed exploration of the memory overhead and mitigations thereof will be important for practical
implications. Finally, consistent with literature in LM optimization [9, 23, 36], our headline runs
use a single training seed for compute reasons; the multi-seed robustness studies in Figure 17 and
Figure 18 confirm that the method ordering is stable across seeds.

Future Work. In addition to the directions for future work mentioned above, there are at least
two additional questions raised by our work. First, because our analysis is on SGD, our convergence
guarantees do not require momentum and it is natural to explore the extent to which the pullback
term alone can compensate for the lack of momentum; this would be a significant practical benefit
of the method, as it would reduce the memory overhead of PACE by one copy of model weights.
Second, throughout our empirical study, we used AdamW as a base optimizer, but modern LM
pretraining pipelines increasingly use second-order methods such as SOAP [36] and MuON [16];
exploring the extent to which PACE can be adapted to these optimizers and whether it provides

                                                                                                  12
similar benefits in that setting is an important direction for future work. Moreover, it is natural to
ask if these second-order preconditioners could be applied to the pullback term itself, which would
be a more direct implementation of the optimal-control solution in (4).


Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the Google TPU Research Cloud for providing some of the compute resources used
in this work.


References
 [1] Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Elie Bakouch, Gabriel Martín Blázquez, Guilherme Penedo,
     Lewis Tunstall, Andrés Marafioti, Hynek Kydlíček, Agustín Piqueres Lajarín, Vaibhav Srivas-
     tav, et al. SmolLM2: When smol goes big – data-centric training of a small language model.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02737, 2025.

 [2] Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Elie Bakouch, Gabriel Martín Blázquez, Guilherme
     Penedo, Lewis Tunstall, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. SmolTalk: A synthetic
     instruction-tuning dataset accompanying SmolLM2. https://huggingface.co/datasets/
     HuggingFaceTB/smoltalk, 2025. Released alongside SmolLM2 [1].

 [3] Adam Block and Cyril Zhang. Ema without the lag: Bias-corrected iterate averaging schemes.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00180, 2025.

 [4] Adam Block, Youssef Mroueh, and Alexander Rakhlin. Generative modeling with denoising
     auto-encoders and langevin sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00107, 2020.

 [5] Adam Block, Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Cyril Zhang.
     Butterfly effects of sgd noise: Error amplification in behavior cloning and autoregression. In
     The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

 [6] Peter J Brockwell and Richard A Davis. Introduction to time series and forecasting. Springer,
     2002.

 [7] Dan Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, Pierre Ablin, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Eeshan Gunesh
     Dhekane, Xavier Suau Cuadros, and Russell Webb. How to scale your ema. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:73122–73174, 2023.

 [8] Aram Davtyan, Sepehr Sameni, Llukman Cerkezi, Givi Meishvili, Adam Bielski, and Paolo
     Favaro. Koala: A kalman optimization algorithm with loss adaptivity. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages 6471–6479, 2022.

 [9] Aaron Defazio, Xingyu Alice Yang, Harsh Mehta, Konstantin Mishchenko, Ahmed Khaled,
     and Ashok Cutkosky. The road less scheduled. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

[10] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
     and stochastic optimization. Journal of machine learning research, 12(7), 2011.

[11] Gemma Team, Google DeepMind. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786,
     2025.

                                                 13
[12] Tryphon T Georgiou and Anders Lindquist. The separation principle in stochastic control,
     redux. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 58(10):2481–2494, 2013.

[13] Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor
     optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1842–1850. PMLR,
     2018.

[14] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
     Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
     Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia
     Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent
     Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

[15] Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon
     Wilson. Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1803.05407, 2018.

[16] Keller Jordan, Yuchen Jin, Vlado Boza, Jiacheng You, Franz Cesista, Laker Newhouse, and
     Jeremy Bernstein. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks, 2024. URL
     https://kellerjordan.github.io/posts/muon/.

[17] Jean Kaddour. Stop wasting my time! saving days of imagenet and bert training with latest
     weight averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14981, 2022.

[18] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

[19] Yury A Kutoyants, Yury A Kutoyants, and Y Kutoyants. Statistical inference for ergodic
     diffusion processes. 2004.

[20] Huibert Kwakernaak and Raphael Sivan. Linear optimal control systems, volume 1. Wiley-
     interscience New York, 1972.

[21] Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze
     Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, Yuling Gu,
     Saumya Malik, Victoria Graf, Jena D. Hwang, Jiangjiang Yang, Ronan Le Bras, Oyvind
     Tafjord, Christopher Wilhelm, Luca Soldaini, Noah A. Smith, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi,
     and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. TÜLU 3: Pushing frontiers in open language model post-training.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15124, 2024.

[22] Laurent Lessard, Benjamin Recht, and Andrew Packard. Analysis and design of optimization
     algorithms via integral quadratic constraints. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 26(1):57–95,
     2016.

[23] Hong Liu, Zhiyuan Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Sophia: A scalable stochastic
     second-order optimizer for language model pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14342, 2023.

[24] Ilya Loshchilov, Frank Hutter, et al. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.05101, 5(5):5, 2017.




                                                 14
[25] Sadhika Malladi, Kaifeng Lyu, Abhishek Panigrahi, and Sanjeev Arora. On the sdes and scaling
     rules for adaptive gradient algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     35:7697–7711, 2022.

[26] Stephan Mandt, Matthew D Hoffman, David M Blei, et al. Continuous-time limit of stochastic
     gradient descent revisited. NIPS-2015, 2015.

[27] Team OLMo, Pete Walsh, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Shane Arora, Akshita
     Bhagia, Yuling Gu, Shengyi Huang, Matt Jordan, et al. 2 olmo 2 furious. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.00656, 2024.

[28] Matteo Pagliardini, Pierre Ablin, and David Grangier. The AdEMAMix optimizer: Better,
     faster, older. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03137, 2024.

[29] Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell,
     Colin Raffel, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The FineWeb datasets: Decanting the
     web for the finest text data at scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024.

[30] Boris T Polyak and Anatoli B Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging.
     SIAM journal on control and optimization, 30(4):838–855, 1992.

[31] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
     Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Technical Report, 2019.

[32] David Ruppert. Efficient estimations from a slowly convergent robbins-monro process. Tech-
     nical report, Cornell University Operations Research and Industrial Engineering, 1988.

[33] Robert H Shumway and David S Stoffer. Time series analysis and its applications: with R
     examples. Springer, 2006.

[34] Minhak Song, Beomhan Baek, Kwangjun Ahn, and Chulhee Yun. Through the river: Un-
     derstanding the benefit of schedule-free methods for language model training. In Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2025. arXiv:2507.09846.

[35] Henk Van de Water and Jan Willems. The certainty equivalence property in stochastic control
     theory. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 26(5):1080–1087, 1981.

[36] Nikhil Vyas, Depen Morwani, Rosie Zhao, Mujin Kwun, Itai Shapira, David Brandfonbrener,
     Lucas Janson, and Sham Kakade. Soap: Improving and stabilizing shampoo using adam. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2409.11321, 2024.

[37] Kaiyue Wen, Zhiyuan Li, Jason Wang, David Hall, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Under-
     standing warmup-stable-decay learning rates: A river valley loss landscape perspective. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2410.05192, 2024.

[38] Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
     Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al. Model
     soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing
     inference time. In International conference on machine learning, pages 23965–23998. PMLR,
     2022.



                                               15
[39] Zixuan Xia, Aram Davtyan, and Paolo Favaro. Koala++: Efficient kalman-based optimization
     with gradient-covariance products. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04432, 2025.

[40] An Yang, Anwen Anwar, Baosong Bao, Beichen Bi, Bo Cai, Changjian Chen, Chao Chen,
     Daohai Chen, Daniel Chen, Daoguang Cheng, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.

[41] Jiongmin Yong and Xun Yu Zhou. Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and HJB equations,
     volume 43. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.

[42] Guodong Zhang, Lala Li, Zachary Nado, James Martens, Sushant Sachdeva, George Dahl,
     Chris Shallue, and Roger B Grosse. Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch sizes?
     insights from a noisy quadratic model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
     2019.

[43] Michael Zhang, James Lucas, Jimmy Ba, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Lookahead optimizer: k steps
     forward, 1 step back. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

[44] Sixin Zhang, Anna E Choromanska, and Yann LeCun. Deep learning with elastic averaging
     sgd. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.




                                               16
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                         1

2 Algorithm Derivation and Guarantees                                                                 4
  2.1 Formal Problem Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4
  2.2 Derivation of the Optimal Control Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
  2.3 Convergence Guarantee in the Convex Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6

3 Introducing PACE: Pullback Averaging Control for Efficient Optimization                             8

4 Empirical Investigation of PACE                                                                      9
  4.1 Empirical Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
  4.2 Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10
  4.3 Further Empirical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10

5 Discussion                                                                                          12

A Further Details on Empirical Setup                                                              18
  A.1 Supplementary figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

B Additional Results                                                                                27
  B.1 Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  B.2 Pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

C Token-Budget Comparisons with WSD                                                                   32

D Technical Preliminaries                                                                    33
  D.1 Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
  D.2 Autoregressive Processes and the Yule-Walker Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

E Mathematical Derivation of PACE                                                              36
  E.1 Optimal Control for the Relaxed Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
  E.2 Optimal Algorithm for the Original Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
  E.3 Generalizing to the Case Where µ⋆ is Unknown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
  E.4 Deriving a Practical Algorithm through Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

F Proofs of Convergence Results                                                                    43
  F.1 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
  F.2 Proof of Proposition 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
  F.3 Proof of Proposition 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49




                                                  17
A     Further Details on Empirical Setup
In this appendix we collect the additional information needed to reproduce the experiments in
Section 4: training data, models, optimizer hyperparameters, per-experiment grids, hardware and
compute, evaluation protocol, and the supplementary figures referenced from the body.

Training data. We use smol-smoltalk [2] as our default fine-tuning corpus, using the fixed
train/validation split prepared for these experiments and packing examples to sequence length
1280. Some supplementary sweeps use tulu-3 [21] with the same supervised fine-tuning pipeline.
For pretraining, we train GPT-2-124M on FineWeb [29].

Models. Table 1 summarises the five model families we consider. The fine-tuning models are
initialized from the official Hugging Face checkpoints. SmolLM2 and Gemma3 use their native
tokenizers.

Training. Unless stated otherwise for the Schedule-Free and WSD baselines, AdamW-family runs
use the standard defaults (β1 , β2 ) = (0.9, 0.999), ε = 10−8 , weight decay ω = 10−2 , gradient clipping
at 1.0, and a 50-step linear warmup followed by a constant learning rate (no decay). Training uses
bfloat16 mixed precision. When needed, we use gradient accumulation to reach the reported
effective batch size. Headline runs use seed 42. The learning rate η varies per experiment and is
reported in Table 2.

Optimizer hyperparameters. PACE adds three tunable hyperparameters on top of standard
AdamW: the pullback strength c, the EMA power κ, and the update frequency uf (per-experiment
values in Table 2). We use γ = 1.0, ρ = 0, and clamp the per-parameter (per-coordinate) pullback
gain λt,i at 1, matching the implementation defaults. For Schedule-Free [9] we use the authors’
reference implementation under their published NanoGPT recipe (β1 =0.98, β2 =0.95, weight decay
0.05, no gradient clipping); learning rate is matched per model.

Hardware and compute. Fine-tuning runs used NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 Blackwell (98 GB)
cards; the GPT-2 pretraining sweep used Google Cloud TPU v6e (Trillium) chips. Per-run budgets
are listed in Table 1.

Evaluation. For supervised fine-tuning we report held-out cross-entropy on the fixed validation
split for each dataset. For pretraining we report cross-entropy on a fixed FineWeb validation shard.
EMA-family methods are evaluated using θtEMA rather than the live iterate (we swap weights at
evaluation time and restore them afterwards); plain AdamW reports its live-weight value; Schedule-
Free reports its native vanilla evaluation since SF does not maintain a separate estimator.

Reproducibility. We will release the code and configuration files needed to reproduce the re-
ported sweeps.

A.1    Supplementary figures
This subsection collects the full hyperparameter-sweep and figures referenced from Section 4 and
the result appendices; takeaways are stated in the captions and discussed where each figure is cited.



                                                   18
Table 1: Per-run training budgets. Fine-tuning runs are one epoch unless noted; pretraining uses
2.5B-tokens.

                                     Model                                    Params         Tokenizer                      Seq. len          Eff. batch / steps
                                     SmolLM2-135M                              135M          SmolLM2                         1280                 128 / 889
                                     SmolLM2-1.7B                               1.7B         SmolLM2                         1280                256 / 1,778
                                     Qwen3-1.7B                                 1.7B         Qwen BPE                        1280                256 / 1,779
                                     Gemma3-1B                                  1.0B         Gemma3                          1280                256 / 1,779
                                     GPT-2-124M                                124M          GPT-2 BPE                       1024                512 / 4,750
       The SmolLM2-135M method-comparison pool used in Fig. 5 uses a long-budget rerun with 3,557 steps.




                                      EMA Power = 0.2                                                EMA Power = 0.5                                                EMA Power = 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 1e-3
                    1.8                                                                                                                                                                               lr = 5e-3



                    1.6
      Gemma3-1B
        Val Loss




                    1.4


                    1.2


                    1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 3e-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 7e-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 1e-3
                   0.85
    SmolLM2-1.7B
      Val Loss




                   0.80



                   0.75



                   0.70




                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 3e-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lr = 5e-4
                   0.90
    Qwen3-1.7B




                   0.85
     Val Loss




                   0.80


                   0.75


                   0.70
                      W

                           A

                                -4

                                      -4

                                            -3

                                                  -3

                                                        -2

                                                              -2

                                                                    -1

                                                                          -1




                                                                                     W

                                                                                          A

                                                                                               -4

                                                                                                     -4

                                                                                                           -3

                                                                                                                 -3

                                                                                                                       -2

                                                                                                                             -2

                                                                                                                                   -1

                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                    W

                                                                                                                                                         A

                                                                                                                                                              -4

                                                                                                                                                                    -4

                                                                                                                                                                          -3

                                                                                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                                                                                      -2

                                                                                                                                                                                            -2

                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                          M




                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                        M
                               1e

                                     5e

                                           1e

                                                 3e

                                                       1e

                                                             3e

                                                                   1e

                                                                         3e




                                                                                              1e

                                                                                                    5e

                                                                                                          1e

                                                                                                                3e

                                                                                                                      1e

                                                                                                                            3e

                                                                                                                                  1e

                                                                                                                                        3e




                                                                                                                                                             1e

                                                                                                                                                                   5e

                                                                                                                                                                         1e

                                                                                                                                                                               3e

                                                                                                                                                                                     1e

                                                                                                                                                                                           3e

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1e

                                                                                                                                                                                                       3e
                    m




                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                                                    m
                          E




                                                                                         E




                                                                                                                                                        E
                   da




                                                                                  da




                                                                                                                                                da
               A




                                                                                 A




                                                                                                                                                A




                                     Pullback strength c                                            Pullback strength c                                            Pullback strength c



Figure 6: Effect of EMA power and pullback strength on SmolLM2-1.7B, Qwen3-1.7B,
and Gemma3-1B. Validation cross-entropy across learning rates, pullback strengths, and EMA
powers. Optimal pullback strength remains relatively robust to learning rate and EMA power, with
improvement over the EMA baseline across a wide range of settings and models.



                                                                                                      19
                      Table 2: Sweep space used by the body and appendix figures.

Figures        Cell                          Sweep space

1, 6, 11       1B fine-tuning                SmolLM2-1.7B: η ∈ {3, 7, 10}×10−4
                                             Qwen3-1.7B: η ∈ {3, 5}×10−4
                                             Gemma3-1B: η ∈ {10−3 , 5×10−3 }
                                             Plotted c bins ∈ {10−4 , 5×10−4 , 10−3 , 3×10−3 ,
                                                                  10−2 , 3×10−2 , 10−1 , 3×10−1 }
                                             κ ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.7}, uf=1

10             Qwen3-1.7B Tulu               η ∈ {3, 5}×10−4 , κ ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.7}
                                             c ∈ {5×10−2 , 10−1 , 1.5×10−1 , 2.5×10−1 }

4, 12, 13      SmolLM2-1.7B clipping         Same SmolLM2-1.7B fine-tuning runs as above; clipping
                                             telemetry is reported for η ∈ {3×10−4 , 10−3 }, κ ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.7},
                                             and c ∈ {5×10−3 , 1.5×10−2 , 5×10−2 , 1.5×10−1 , 5×10−1 }.

3, 8           SmolLM2-135M                  Dense sweep: η ∈ {1, 1.5, 2, 3, 5}×10−3
                                             c ∈ {0, 10−4 , 10−3 , 3×10−3 , 10−2 ,
                                                  3×10−2 , 10−1 , 3×10−1 }
                                             κ ∈ {0.3, 0.5, 0.7}, uf ∈ {1, 5, 10}

5, 7, 14, 15   Method and WSD comparisons    SmolLM2-135M: AdamW/EMA/PACE at η ∈ {10−3 , 5×10−3 };
                                             Schedule-Free: η ∈ {10−3 , 3×10−3 , 5×10−3 , 10−2 }
                                             WSD baselines use η ∈ {1, 1.5, 2, 3, 5}×10−3
                                             Qwen3-1.7B: AdamW/EMA/PACE at η ∈ {3, 5}×10−4 ;
                                             Schedule-Free at η ∈ {3×10−4 , 10−3 }.

2, 9, 18       GPT-2-124M                    η ∈ {3×10−4 , 10−3 , 1.5×10−3 , 2×10−3 ,
                                                  2.5×10−3 , 3×10−3 , 10−2 }
                                             c: coarse grid 10−4 –3×10−1 plus local grid 1×10−3 –10−2
                                             κ ∈ {0.2, 0.5, 0.7}, uf=1

16, 17         1B schedules and seeds        Schedules ∈ {constant, cosine, WSD} for AdamW/EMA
                                             at each model’s headline η (10−3 for SmolLM2-1.7B and
                                             Gemma3-1B, 5×10−4 for Qwen3-1.7B); PACE at a constant
                                             η.
                                             Multi-seed: SmolLM2-1.7B at η=10−3 , seeds {42, 1337, 2024}.

5              SmolLM2-135M budgets          AdamW WSD at token budgets {444, 667, 889} steps,
                                             η ∈ {3, 5}×10−3 ; PACE at a constant learning rate over the full
                                             budget (c=10−1 , κ=0.3).

2, 18, 19      GPT-2-124M schedules          Shared grid per schedule (constant, cosine, WSD) at
                                             η=2×10−3 :
                                             c ∈ {3×10−4 , 10−3 , 2×10−3 , 3×10−3 , 5×10−3 , 7×10−3 , 10−2 }
                                             κ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5}, plus AdamW and EMA, each trained at
                                             three seeds {0, 1, 42}.

20             GPT-2-124M budgets            WSD at token budgets {2375, 3563, 4750} steps
                                             (η=2×10−3 , κ=0.5, c=3×10−3 ); the token-budget overlay uses
                                             PACE at a constant learning rate (c=2×10−3 , κ=0.5).




                                                   20
                                                 SmolLM2-135M                                                   Qwen3-1.7B
                               1.5
                                                                           AdamW                                              PACE
                                                                                         1.00
                                                                           EMA                                                Schedule-Free
                               1.4                                                       0.95
                  Train Loss




                                                                                         0.90
                               1.3                                                       0.85

                                                                                         0.80
                               1.2
                                                                                         0.75

                                                                                         0.70
                               1.1
                                                                                         0.65

                                     0   500   1000   1500   2000   2500   3000   3500          0   250   500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750
                                                        Step                                                       Step




Figure 7: Training-loss comparison of PACE to Schedule-Free [9], AdamW, and EMA on
fine-tuning. Smoothed training loss on the same model selections as Fig. 5. Although PACE has
higher training loss than Schedule-Free in this view, its validation loss is competitive in Fig. 5.




                                                                                    21
                                                 EMA Power = 0.3                                         EMA Power = 0.5                                         EMA Power = 0.7
                               1.22                                                                                                                                          lr = 1e-3
                                                                                                                                                                             lr = 1.5e-3
                               1.21                                                                                                                                          lr = 2e-3
                                                                                                                                                                             lr = 3e-3
   Frequency = 1




                               1.20
                    Val Loss




                               1.19

                               1.18

                               1.17

                               1.16

                               1.15

                               1.14




                               1.26


                               1.24
   Frequency = 5




                               1.22
                    Val Loss




                               1.20


                               1.18


                               1.16


                               1.14




                               1.28

                               1.26
   Frequency = 10




                               1.24
                    Val Loss




                               1.22

                               1.20

                               1.18

                               1.16

                               1.14
                                  W


                                       A

                                            -4

                                                   -3

                                                         -3

                                                               -2

                                                                     -2

                                                                           -1

                                                                                 -1




                                                                                          W


                                                                                               A

                                                                                                    -4

                                                                                                           -3

                                                                                                                 -3

                                                                                                                       -2

                                                                                                                             -2

                                                                                                                                   -1

                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                  W


                                                                                                                                                       A

                                                                                                                                                            -4

                                                                                                                                                                   -3

                                                                                                                                                                         -3

                                                                                                                                                                                   -2

                                                                                                                                                                                            -2

                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                      M




                                                                                              M




                                                                                                                                                      M
                                           1e

                                                 1e

                                                        3e

                                                              1e

                                                                    3e

                                                                          1e

                                                                                3e




                                                                                                   1e

                                                                                                         1e

                                                                                                                3e

                                                                                                                      1e

                                                                                                                            3e

                                                                                                                                  1e

                                                                                                                                        3e




                                                                                                                                                           1e

                                                                                                                                                                 1e

                                                                                                                                                                        3e

                                                                                                                                                                                1e

                                                                                                                                                                                           3e

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1e

                                                                                                                                                                                                       3e
                                m




                                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                                  m
                                      E




                                                                                              E




                                                                                                                                                      E
                               da




                                                                                      da




                                                                                                                                              da
                           A




                                                                                      A




                                                                                                                                              A




                                                Pullback strength c                                     Pullback strength c                                     Pullback strength c



Figure 8: Effect of update frequency, EMA power, and pullback strength. Validation
cross-entropy of SmolLM2-135M for different learning rates, pullback strengths, EMA powers, and
update frequencies. Optimal pullback strength remains relatively robust to learning rate and update
frequency, with improvement over the EMA baseline across a wide range of settings.




                                                                                                          22
                                        EMA Power = 0.2                                            EMA Power = 0.5                                             EMA Power = 0.7
            3.90                                                               3.90                                                  3.90

            3.85                                                               3.85                                                  3.85

            3.80                                                               3.80                                                  3.80
 Val Loss




                                                                               3.75                                                  3.75
            3.75
                                                                               3.70                                                  3.70
            3.70
                                                                               3.65                                                                                                             AdamW
                                                                                                                                     3.65
            3.65                                                                                                                                                                                lr = 3e-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                lr = 1e-3
                                                                               3.60                                                  3.60                                                       lr = 2e-3
            3.60                                                                                                                                                                                lr = 3e-3
                                                                               3.55                                                  3.55                                                       lr = 1e-2
                W


                             A

                                   -4

                                         -3

                                                -3

                                                      -2

                                                             -2

                                                                    -1

                                                                          -1




                                                                                      W
                                                                                       A
                                                                                      -4
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -3
                                                                                      -2
                                                                                      -2
                                                                                      -1
                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                          W


                                                                                                                                                    A

                                                                                                                                                          -4

                                                                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                                                                       -3

                                                                                                                                                                             -2

                                                                                                                                                                                    -2

                                                                                                                                                                                           -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                         M




                                                                                     M




                                                                                                                                                M
                                 1e

                                        1e

                                              3e

                                                     1e

                                                            3e

                                                                  1e

                                                                         3e




                                                                                   1e
                                                                                   1e
                                                                                   2e
                                                                                   2e
                                                                                   3e
                                                                                   3e
                                                                                   4e
                                                                                   5e
                                                                                   7e
                                                                                   1e
                                                                                   3e
                                                                                   1e
                                                                                   3e




                                                                                                                                                        1e

                                                                                                                                                               1e

                                                                                                                                                                     3e

                                                                                                                                                                            1e

                                                                                                                                                                                   3e

                                                                                                                                                                                         1e

                                                                                                                                                                                                 3e
               m




                                                                                    m




                                                                                                                                         m
                         E




                                                                                   E




                                                                                                                                                E
            da




                                                                               da




                                                                                                                                     da
        A




                                                                               A




                                                                                                                                     A
                                      Pullback strength c                                         Pullback strength c                                        Pullback strength c



Figure 9: Effect of EMA power and pullback strength on pretraining. Validation cross-
entropy on GPT-2-124M trained on FineWeb for different learning rates, pullback strengths, and
EMA powers. Optimal pullback strength remains robust, with improvement over the EMA baseline
across a wide range of settings.




                                        EMA Power = 0.2                                            EMA Power = 0.5                                             EMA Power = 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                lr = 3e-4
               1.7                                                                                                                                                                              lr = 5e-4


               1.6

               1.5
    Val Loss




               1.4

               1.3

               1.2

               1.1

               1.0
                         AdamW                  EMA                    PACE               AdamW            EMA                PACE              AdamW                  EMA                    PACE
                                                                                                         Method




               1.7                                                                                                                                                                               AdamW
                                                                                                                                                                                                 EMA
               1.6                                                                                                                                                                               PACE


               1.5
    Val Loss




               1.4

               1.3

               1.2

               1.1

               1.0
                     0       500      1000    1500   2000    2500      3000           0     500   1000   1500   2000   2500   3000          0       500      1000    1500   2000    2500      3000
                                                                                                           Step




Figure 10: Effect of EMA power and pullback strength on Qwen3-1.7B Tulu-3 fine-
tuning. Validation cross-entropy across learning rates and EMA powers. Top: final validation loss
for AdamW, EMA, and PACE. Bottom: validation trajectories at η = 3×10−4 . PACE improves
over the matched AdamW and EMA baselines across the reported settings.




                                                                                                         23
                                  SmolLM2-1.7B                                             Qwen3-1.7B                                                Gemma3-1B
            0.800
                                                          AdamW                                                                 1.3
                                                                      1.1
                                                          EMA
            0.775                                         PACE
                                                                                                                                1.2
                                                                      1.0
 Val Loss




            0.750
                                                                                                                                1.1
                                                                      0.9
            0.725
                                                                                                                                1.0
                                                                      0.8
            0.700
                                                                                                                                0.9

                           400          800      1200      1600                    400          800         1200     1600                    400          800      1200     1600




                           SmolLM2-1.7B (last 25%)                                 Qwen3-1.7B (last 25%)                                     Gemma3-1B (last 25%)
                                                                    0.765
            0.712


                                                                    0.750                                                     0.925
            0.704
 Val Loss




                                                                    0.735                                                     0.900
            0.696

                                                                    0.720                                                     0.875
            0.688

                                                                    0.705
                                                                                                                              0.850
                    1440         1520     1600     1680      1760           1440         1520        1600     1680     1760           1440         1520     1600     1680     1760
                                         Step                                                    Step                                                      Step




Figure 11: Last 25% of the cross-entropy trajectories from Fig. 1. The top row shows the
full validation trajectories, and the bottom row zooms into the final quarter of training. PACE shows
a clear improvement on SmolLM2-1.7B, Qwen3-1.7B, and Gemma3-1B.




                                                                                                24
                                                            EMA Power = 0.2                                               EMA Power = 0.5                                               EMA Power = 0.7
                                      1.0                                                           1.0                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.005
Learning rate = 3×10−4
Fraction λ clipped at 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.05
                                      0.8                                                           0.8                                                           0.8                                                  c = 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c = 0.5


                                      0.6                                                           0.6                                                           0.6


                                      0.4                                                           0.4                                                           0.4


                                      0.2                                                           0.2                                                           0.2


                                      0.0                                                           0.0                                                           0.0
                                            0       250    500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0       250    500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0       250    500    750   1000   1250     1500     1750




                                      1.0                                                           1.0                                                           1.0
Fraction λ clipped at 1
 Learning rate = 10−3




                                      0.8                                                           0.8                                                           0.8


                                      0.6                                                           0.6                                                           0.6


                                      0.4                                                           0.4                                                           0.4


                                      0.2                                                           0.2                                                           0.2


                                      0.0                                                           0.0                                                           0.0
                                            0       250    500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0       250    500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750         0       250    500    750   1000   1250     1500     1750
                                                                    Step                                                          Step                                                          Step




Figure 12: Fraction of clipped updates over training. Fraction of parameters with saturated
pullback gain λt,i = 1 on SmolLM2-1.7B, across learning rate, EMA power, and pullback strength.
Saturation increases with pullback strength and is most pronounced for smaller EMA power.




                                                            EMA Power = 0.2                                               EMA Power = 0.5                                               EMA Power = 0.7
                                      1.0                                                           1.0                                                           1.0                                      Learning rate = 3e-04
            Fraction λ clipped at 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Learning rate = 1e-03


                                      0.8                                                           0.8                                                           0.8


                                      0.6                                                           0.6                                                           0.6


                                      0.4                                                           0.4                                                           0.4


                                      0.2                                                           0.2                                                           0.2


                                      0.0                                                           0.0                                                           0.0
                                            0.005         0.015     0.05       0.15          0.5          0.005         0.015     0.05       0.15          0.5          0.005         0.015     0.05        0.15            0.5
                                                           Pullback strength c                                           Pullback strength c                                           Pullback strength c




Figure 13: End-of-training fraction of clipped updates. Fraction of parameters with saturated
pullback gain λt,i = 1 on SmolLM2-1.7B as a function of pullback strength and learning rate. Smaller
EMA power reaches saturation at smaller pullback strengths.




                                                                                                                                25
                       Learning rate = 2e-03                   Learning rate = 3e-03                   Learning rate = 5e-03
             1.6                                     1.6                                                                       AdamW
                                                                                                                               EMA
                                                                                             1.6                               PACE

             1.5                                     1.5
                                                                                             1.5
  Val Loss




             1.4                                     1.4
                                                                                             1.4

             1.3                                     1.3
                                                                                             1.3


             1.2                                     1.2                                     1.2


                   0   200    400     600      800         0   200    400     600      800         0   200    400     600      800
                               Step                                    Step                                    Step




Figure 14: PACE against AdamW and EMA under fine-tuning. Validation cross-entropy
on SmolLM2-135M at three learning rates, with the baselines given their best decay schedule and
PACE held at a constant learning rate. PACE ends below both baselines at every learning rate, and
its margin over them grows sharply as the learning rate increases.




                                                                     26
B     Additional Results
B.1    Fine-tuning
The advantage of PACE over AdamW and EMA is robust: it holds whatever learning-rate schedule
the baselines are given (Figure 16) and across three random seeds (Figure 17).

Baselines across all learning-rate schedules. Even when AdamW and EMA are given their
best schedule—constant, cosine, or WSD—PACE at a constant learning rate stays below both, on
all three models (Figure 16).

                                                       SmolLM2-135M
                            1.28      AdamW
                                      EMA
                            1.26      PACE


                            1.24
                 Val Loss




                            1.22

                            1.20

                            1.18

                            1.16

                            1.14

                                   0.001      0.0015       0.002       0.003   0.005
                                                       Learning rate




Figure 15: Fine-tuning across learning rates. Best validation cross-entropy on SmolLM2-135M
for AdamW, EMA, and PACE, with the baselines given their best decay schedule and PACE held
at a constant learning rate. PACE attains the lowest loss at every learning rate, by a margin that
widens as the learning rate increases and the baselines degrade.


Multi-seed robustness. Across three seeds, the entire PACE band stays below those of AdamW
and EMA at every step—under both a constant learning rate and WSD, on all three models—so
the improvement exceeds the seed-to-seed spread (Figure 17).

B.2    Pretraining
In pretraining, PACE beats both the AdamW and EMA baselines under every learning-rate sched-
ule, and the best pullback strength is the same under all of them. The figures below show the
full pullback-strength sweep on GPT-2-124M (trained from scratch on FineWeb at the Chinchilla-
optimal budget), as the mean over three seeds {0, 1, 42}.

Multi-seed pullback-strength sweep across schedules. Figure 18 sweeps the pullback strength
c under all three schedules (the AdamW and best-κ EMA baselines are the two leftmost ticks). Two
things stand out. First, at its optimum PACE beats both baselines under every schedule, and the
improvement holds across a band of pullback strengths (10−3 ≤ c ≤ 3×10−3 )—wider still under
WSD and cosine. Second, the optimum is the same (c ≈ 3×10−3 ) under all three schedules, so
the choice of c transfers. WSD with PACE is best overall (3.507 ± 0.006, below the constant-LR
optimum of 3.537 ± 0.004 by several times the seed spread), and PACE at a constant learning rate
comes within 0.006 of AdamW under WSD (3.537 vs. 3.531) with no schedule at all. Figure 19



                                                         27
resolves the same grid by the EMA power κ (at seed 42) and shows a basin around the optimal c
at every κ.




                                             28
                                      Constant LR                                                Cosine                                                    WSD
               0.90                                                      0.90                                                     0.90
                                                    AdamW
                                                    EMA
               0.85                                 PACE (constant)      0.85                                                     0.85
SmolLM2-1.7B
  Val Loss




               0.80                                                      0.80                                                     0.80



               0.75                                                      0.75                                                     0.75



               0.70                                                      0.70                                                     0.70


                      0   250   500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750




               1.00                                                      1.00                                                     1.00

               0.95                                                      0.95                                                     0.95
Qwen3-1.7B




               0.90                                                      0.90                                                     0.90
 Val Loss




               0.85                                                      0.85                                                     0.85

               0.80                                                      0.80                                                     0.80

               0.75                                                      0.75                                                     0.75

               0.70                                                      0.70                                                     0.70
                      0   250   500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750




               1.15                                                      1.15                                                     1.15

               1.10                                                      1.10                                                     1.10
Gemma3-1B
  Val Loss




               1.05                                                      1.05                                                     1.05

               1.00                                                      1.00                                                     1.00

               0.95                                                      0.95                                                     0.95

               0.90                                                      0.90                                                     0.90

               0.85                                                      0.85                                                     0.85

                      0   250   500    750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750          0   250   500   750   1000   1250   1500   1750
                                         Step                                                     Step                                                     Step




Figure 16: PACE against the baselines under every learning-rate schedule. Validation
cross-entropy on smol-smoltalk; rows are models, columns are the baselines’ learning-rate schedule
(constant, cosine, WSD), with the PACE constant-learning-rate run as the reference in each panel.
PACE improves on both baselines under every schedule on all three models.




                                                                                                29
                     SmolLM2-1.7B (Constant LR)                                          Qwen3-1.7B (Constant LR)                                         Gemma3-1B (Constant LR)
            1.05                                                                                                                             1.3
                                                              AdamW
                                                              EMA            1.1
            1.00
                                                              PACE
            0.95                                                                                                                             1.2
                                                                             1.0
 Val Loss




            0.90
                                                                                                                                             1.1
            0.85                                                             0.9
            0.80                                                                                                                             1.0

            0.75                                                             0.8
                                                                                                                                             0.9
            0.70
                                                                             0.7
                   250   500   750        1000         1250   1500   1750          250    500     750        1000   1250   1500   1750              250    500     750    1000   1250   1500   1750




                         SmolLM2-1.7B (WSD)                                                    Qwen3-1.7B (WSD)                                                Gemma3-1B (WSD)
            1.00                                                            1.05
                                                                                                                                            1.20
            0.95                                                            1.00
                                                                                                                                            1.15
            0.90                                                            0.95
                                                                                                                                            1.10
 Val Loss




            0.85                                                            0.90                                                            1.05
                                                                            0.85                                                            1.00
            0.80
                                                                            0.80                                                            0.95
            0.75
                                                                            0.75                                                            0.90
            0.70
                                                                            0.70                                                            0.85

                   250   500   750        1000         1250   1500   1750          250    500     750        1000   1250   1500   1750              250    500     750    1000   1250   1500   1750
                                     Step                                                               Step                                                             Step




Figure 17: Multi-seed robustness of fine-tuning. Across three seeds, PACE stays below both
AdamW and EMA on all three models, under both a constant learning rate and WSD, by more than
the seed-to-seed variation at every step.




                                                                                          GPT-2-124M pretraining

                                                                                                                                         constant          PACE
                                                3.64
                                                                                                                                         cosine            AdamW
                                                3.62                                                                                     WSD               EMA

                                                3.60
                                     Val Loss




                                                3.58

                                                3.56

                                                3.54

                                                3.52

                                                3.50
                                                       W




                                                                     A




                                                                             -4




                                                                                          -3




                                                                                                        -3




                                                                                                                      -3




                                                                                                                                   -3




                                                                                                                                              -3




                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                     M




                                                                            3e




                                                                                         1e




                                                                                                   2e




                                                                                                                    3e




                                                                                                                                  5e




                                                                                                                                             7e




                                                                                                                                                          1e
                                                       m




                                                                 E
                                                   da
                                                  A




                                                                                              Pullback strength c



Figure 18: Multi-seed pullback-strength sweep across learning-rate schedules on GPT-2-
124M pretraining. Mean returned-model validation cross-entropy with seed-to-seed standard devi-
ation, comparing PACE to the AdamW and EMA baselines under each schedule. PACE improves on
both baselines under every schedule, by more than the seed-to-seed variation.




                                                                                                   30
                                        Constant                                                  Cosine                                                        WSD

            3.64                                                      3.64                                                      3.64            AdamW
                                                                                                                                                κ = 0.1
            3.62                                                      3.62                                                      3.62
                                                                                                                                                κ = 0.2
            3.60                                                      3.60                                                      3.60            κ = 0.3
                                                                                                                                                κ = 0.5
 Val Loss




            3.58                                                      3.58                                                      3.58

            3.56                                                      3.56                                                      3.56

            3.54                                                      3.54                                                      3.54

            3.52                                                      3.52                                                      3.52

            3.50                                                      3.50                                                      3.50

            3.48                                                      3.48                                                      3.48
                W


                        A

                             -4

                                   -3

                                         -3

                                               -3

                                                     -3

                                                           -3

                                                                 -2




                                                                          W


                                                                                  A

                                                                                       -4

                                                                                             -3

                                                                                                   -3

                                                                                                         -3

                                                                                                               -3

                                                                                                                     -3

                                                                                                                           -2




                                                                                                                                    W


                                                                                                                                            A

                                                                                                                                                  -4

                                                                                                                                                          -3

                                                                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                                                                      -3

                                                                                                                                                                            -3

                                                                                                                                                                                  -3

                                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                    M




                                                                              M




                                                                                                                                        M
                            3e

                                  1e

                                        2e

                                              3e

                                                    5e

                                                          7e

                                                                1e




                                                                                      3e

                                                                                            1e

                                                                                                  2e

                                                                                                        3e

                                                                                                              5e

                                                                                                                    7e

                                                                                                                          1e




                                                                                                                                                3e

                                                                                                                                                       1e

                                                                                                                                                               2e

                                                                                                                                                                     3e

                                                                                                                                                                           5e

                                                                                                                                                                                 7e

                                                                                                                                                                                       1e
                m




                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                    m
                    E




                                                                              E




                                                                                                                                        E
            da




                                                                      da




                                                                                                                                da
            A




                                                                      A




                                                                                                                                A




                             Pullback strength c                                       Pullback strength c                                         Pullback strength c



Figure 19: Pullback-strength sweep resolved by EMA power on GPT-2-124M pretraining
(seed 42), under a constant learning rate (left), cosine decay (middle), and WSD (right). A basin
spanning c ≈ 2–3×10−3 appears at every κ under every schedule.




                                                                                                  31
C     Token-Budget Comparisons with WSD
In Figure 2 (right) and Figure 5 (right) we compared PACE at a constant learning rate to AdamW
with linear decay to zero. In this appendix we make that comparison systematic for pretraining
and interpret both regimes. The analysis is inspired by the token-budget comparisons used to
study Schedule-Free methods [9, 34], and we read it through the river-valley description of the loss
landscape [34, 37]: at a constant learning rate, the iterate oscillates along the steep “hill” directions
of a valley while making steady progress along its flat “river” floor, and the decay phase of WSD acts
by suppressing this oscillation and bringing the iterate down to the floor. This perspective makes
clear both the appeal of WSD and its cost: although the decay phase produces the characteristic
sharp drop in loss at the end of training, until it begins the loss curve overstates the loss the model
could achieve, so that model quality is difficult to assess mid-training, and once it begins, the
remainder of the run is committed to a single token budget. An optimizer whose returned iterate
already lies on the river floor incurs neither cost: its loss curve reflects post-decay performance at
every step of training, and training may be stopped or continued at any point.
    The token-budget comparison tests exactly this property. Because a decay branch primarily
removes oscillation while making little further progress along the river, the endpoint of a branch
launched at a given budget estimates the position of the river at that budget. Comparing the
endpoints of branches launched at several budgets to a candidate trajectory thus determines whether
that trajectory tracks the river: endpoints that coincide with the trajectory indicate that it already
lies on the floor, while endpoints that fall below it reveal residual oscillation that a decay phase
would have removed. We run this comparison in both regimes—branches at 50%/75%/100% of
the pretraining budget, and at three budgets and two learning rates in fine-tuning—with all runs
sharing data, batch size, and base learning rate.

Pretraining. In Figure 20, we overlay the AdamW decay branches on the PACE constant-learning-
rate trajectory. Every branch lands on the trajectory: the endpoints (3.721/3.597/3.530) match
PACE at the same budgets (≈ 3.707/3.595/3.534) to within 0.014, and to within 0.004 at the full
budget—closer than the seed-to-seed spread. At every budget, decaying the learning rate only
recovers the loss that PACE already reaches without a schedule.

Fine-tuning. The fine-tuning comparison in Figure 5 (right) yields a stronger conclusion: ev-
ery budget-matched branch ends above the PACE trajectory, with endpoints of 1.277/1.233/1.205
against PACE at 1.153, and the gap widens at larger learning rates. In this regime, no decay branch
reaches the loss of the constant-learning-rate PACE run at any budget.

Peeling off intermediate checkpoints to decay. Across every budget, learning rate, and
regime that we tested, no decay branch ends below the PACE trajectory, which is precisely the
behavior this comparison associates with a trajectory that already lies on the river floor. The
practical consequences are those identified above: the validation curve of PACE reflects post-decay
performance at every step, so that model quality is visible throughout training, and the loss that
WSD attains only at the designated endpoint of a branch is available at every budget, without fixing
a training horizon in advance. In fine-tuning, we find the stronger conclusion that the PACE tra-
jectory lies below every budget-matched branch endpoint, suggesting that the modified trajectory
makes faster progress along the river than the trajectory from which the branches descend.




                                                   32
                                                 GPT-2-124M pretraining
                              4.3
                                                                                PACE (constant)
                              4.2                                               AdamW WSD 50%
                                                                                AdamW WSD 75%
                              4.1                                               AdamW WSD 100%


                              4.0




                   Val Loss
                              3.9

                              3.8

                              3.7

                              3.6


                                    0   20         40             60       80                 100
                                                   Token budget (%)




Figure 20: Token-budget comparison on GPT-2-124M pretraining. AdamW WSD decay
branches at 50%/75%/100% of the token budget overlaid on the PACE constant-learning-rate tra-
jectory; each branch endpoint lands on the PACE trajectory, so the decay phase only recovers the
loss that PACE attains continuously without a schedule.

D     Technical Preliminaries
In this appendix, we review some technical preliminaries that will be useful for our analysis. In
Section D.1, we review some classical results from the theory of linear quadratic stochastic control,
which we will use to derive our algorithm. Then in Section D.2 we describe some classical results
on autoregressive processes, which we will use to analyze the convergence of our algorithm in the
quadratic optimization setting.

D.1    Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) Problems
In this section, we briefly review several classical results from the theory of linear quadratic stochas-
tic control, which will be useful for our analysis. Classical references for this material include
Kwakernaak and Sivan [20], Yong and Zhou [41] among many others.
    A Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) control problem is a stochastic control problem where the
dynamics of the system are linear, the cost function is quadratic, and the noise is Gaussian. More
particularly, we suppose that xut ∈ Rd is a stochastic process satisfying
                                         dxut = (Axut + But ) dt + CWt ,                             (7)
where A, B, C are matrices of appropriate dimensions, ut is a control input (and thus progressively
measurable with respect to the filtration generated by Wt ), and Wt is a standard Brownian motion
in Rd . For fixed time horizon T , we then seek to minimize a cost function of the form
                                               Z T                    
                                    u⊤      u         u⊤    u    ⊤
                        J(u) = E xT Qf xT +          xt Qxt + ut Rut dt ,                       (8)
                                                        0
where Qf , Q, R are positive semidefinite matrices of appropriate dimensions. The intuition for this
cost is that we wish to minimize the expected deviation of the state xut from the origin, while also
ensuring that the control inputs ut are not too large; we pay both a final cost for the end state
xuT being far from the origin as well as a running cost for both intermediate states being far from
the origin and control inputs being large. This problem is classical and has been well-studied in
the control theory literature. We recall the fundamental result that the optimal control strategy is
given by a linear state feedback controller, where the feedback gain is given by the solution to a
matrix Riccati differential equation [12, 20].

                                                        33
Theorem 4 ([41] Theorem 6.1). Suppose that xut evolves according to (7) for some progressively
measurable ut . Suppose further that Q, Qf , R are all symmetric and positive semidefinite and that R
is positive definite. Let P : [0, T ] → Rd×d be the solution to the matrix Riccati differential equation
                      −Ṗt = A⊤ Pt + Pt A − Pt BR−1 B⊤ Pt + Q,           PT = Qf ,                  (9)

where Ṗt denotes the time derivative of Pt . Then it holds that the optimal control ut that minimizes
the cost function J(u) defined in (8) is given by
                                          ut = −R−1 B⊤ Pt xut
and the optimal cost is given by
                                                     Z T           
                                 J(u) = x⊤
                                         0 P0 x0 +         Tr Pt CC⊤ dt.
                                                      0

    While the Riccati equation provides the optimal controller in full generality, we will not require
this in the sequel. We thus state two corollaries, corresponding to special cases of the LQG problem,
that will be sufficient for our purposes. In the first, we will ignore any final state cost (so Qf = 0),
and assume that both Q and R are scalar multiples of the identity.
Corollary 1. Suppose that xut evolves according to (7) for some progressively measurable ut , and
that Qf = 0, Q = q · I, and R = r · I for some q, r > 0. Suppose further that B = I. Then the
optimal control ut that minimizes the cost function J(u) defined in (8) is given by
            ut = −r−1 Pt xut ,   where   − Ṗt = A⊤ Pt + Pt A − r−1 Pt2 + q · I,       PT = 0.
   In the second corollary, we will now ignore the running state cost (so Q = 0), and assume that
Qf and R are scalar multiples of the identity.
Corollary 2. Suppose that xut evolves according to (7) for some progressively measurable ut , and
that Q = 0, Qf = q · I, and R = r · I for some q, r > 0. Suppose further that B = I. Then the
optimal control ut that minimizes the cost function J(u) defined in (8) is given by
                ut = −r−1 Pt xut ,   where   Ṗt = A⊤ Pt + Pt A − r−1 Pt2 ,      PT = q · I.
   Finally, we specialize to the fully scalar case, where A is diagonal and prove here a closed-
form solution to the Riccati equation. While this calculation is standard, we include it here for
completeness.
Lemma 1. Let p : [0, T ] → R be the solution to the scalar Riccati equation
                             −ṗ(t) = 2ap(t) − r−1 p(t)2 + q,     p(T ) = qf .
Let
                                                                p
                              β± = r(a ± ω),      where    ω=    a2 + r−1 q.
Let
                                               qf − β+ −2ω(T −t)
                                      κ(t) =            ·e       .
                                               qf − β −
Then
                                                  β+ − κ(t)β−
                                         p(t) =               .
                                                    1 − κ(t)

                                                     34
Proof. Note that by factoring we have

                                 ṗ(t) = r−1 (p(t) − β+ ) (p(t) − β− ) .

Thus, when ω > 0, we have by a standard separation of variables argument that
                                  p(t) − β+   qf − β+ −2ω(T −t)
                                            =          ·e       .
                                  p(t) − β−   qf − β −
The result follows by rearranging.

D.2    Autoregressive Processes and the Yule-Walker Equations
We now review some classical results on autoregressive processes, which we will use to analyze the
convergence of our algorithm in the quadratic optimization setting. We refer to [6, 33] for a more
detailed review of this material. We begin with a definition of autoregressive processes.
Definition 1. We say a sequence of random variables {Xk }k≥0 is an autoregressive process of order
p (AR(p)) if it satisfies, for k ≥ p,
                                                     p
                                                     X
                                          Xk =             ϕi Xk−i + εk ,
                                                     i=1

for some ϕ1 , . . . , ϕp ∈ R and some sequence of i.i.d. random variables {εk }k≥0 with mean zero and
finite variance. The characteristic polynomial of the AR(p) process is given by
                                                                p
                                                                X
                                           ϕ(z) = 1 −                 ϕi z i .
                                                                i=1

Moreover, we say that the process is causal if it can be represented as
                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                               Xk =             ψj εk−j ,
                                                        j=0
                                      P∞
with the coefficients ψj satisfying     j=0 |ψj | < ∞.

   Formally causality is necessary for us to ensure a limiting variance; fortunately there exists a
simple characterization of causality in terms of the roots of the characteristic polynomial.
Proposition 4 (Property 3.1 [33]). An AR(p) process is causal if and only if the roots of the
characteristic polynomial ϕ(z) lie outside the unit circle in the complex plane. In this case, Xk has
a well-defined limiting variance.
    We now recall the Yule-Walker equations, which relate the coefficients ϕi of an AR(p) process
to the autocovariance function γ(j) = E[Xk Xk+j ].
Theorem 5 (Section 3 [33]). Let {Xk }k≥0 be a causal AR(p) process with coefficients ϕ1 , . . . , ϕp
such that εk has variance σ 2 . Then the autocovariance function γ(j) = E[Xk Xk+j ] satisfies the
following equations for all j ≥ 0:
                                               p
                                               X
                                      γ(j) =         ϕi γ(j − i) + σ 2 · δj,0 ,
                                               i=1


                                                           35
In particular, if p = 2, it holds that

                                   γ(1) = ϕ1 · γ(0)
                                   γ(2) = ϕ1 · γ(1) + ϕ2 · γ(0)
                                   γ(0) = ϕ1 · γ(1) + ϕ2 · γ(2) + σ 2 .

    Finally, we recall the following result on the limiting variance of an AR(2) process.
Lemma 2. Let {Xk }k≥0 be a causal AR(2) process with coefficients ϕ1 , ϕ2 such that εk has variance
σ 2 with fixed, deterministic X1 , X2 . If ϕ(z) ̸= 0 for all complex |z| ≤ 1, then the limiting variance
of Xk is given by

                                           lim E[Xk2 ] = γ(0).
                                           k→∞

Proof. This follows immediately from Definition 3.7 and Property 3.1 of Shumway and Stoffer [33].
Indeed, let Xk′ denote the AR(2) process with the same coefficients ϕ1 , ϕ2 and noise εk but with
zero initial conditions X1′ = X2′ = 0. By causality, Xk′ has a well-defined limiting variance given by
γ(0). Thus it suffices to show that Yk = Xk − Xk′ has zero variance in the limit. Observe that

                                         Yk = ϕ1 Yk−1 + ϕ2 Yk−2 ,

so it remains to show that Yk → 0 as k → ∞. Writing out the transition matrix, we see that the
eigenvalues thereof are the reciprocals of the roots of ϕ(z). Because ϕ(z) ̸= 0 for all |z| ≤ 1, the
eigenvalues of the transition matrix are strictly less than 1 in magnitude, so Yk → 0 as k → ∞.


E       Mathematical Derivation of PACE
In this appendix we provide a complete formal derivation of our proposed algorithm. Recall that
we abstract the master optimization problem as the following stochastic control problem:
                                      Z T          
                                2
   min JT (u) = E θbEMA,T − µ⋆ + λ ·       ∥ut ∥2 dt , dθtu = [A (µ⋆ − θtu ) + ut ] dt + Σ1/2 dWt .
    u                                       0
                                                                                                   (10)

In other words, we are running (a continuous time limit of) stochastic gradient descent on a quadratic
objective f (θ) = 21 (θ − µ⋆ )⊤ A (θ − µ⋆ ) perturbed by some control input ut , and we wish to choose
ut so as to minimize the mean squared error of the returned iterate θbEMA,T as an estimator of µ⋆ ,
plus a regularization term ensuring that the control inputs ut are not too large. We provide a
complete characterization of the optimal control strategy for this problem, and then show how to
derive a simple approximation to this optimal control strategy that is both practical and empirically
effective.
    In Section E.1 we first consider a relaxed objective, which leads to a simpler optimal control
strategy that helps illustrate the main ideas of the analysis. Then, in Section E.2, we derive the
optimal control strategy for the actual objective defined in (10), subject to the assumption that µ⋆
is known to the learner. Because this is, of course, an unrealistic assumption, we then show how
the principle of certainty equivalence can be used to derive the optimal controller even when µ⋆
is unknown, and how this optimal controller can be approximated to yield a simple and practical
algorithm. Finally, in Section E.3, we show how the optimal controller can be approximated even
when µ⋆ is unknown, and how this approximation leads to the form of the controller used in our
proposed algorithm.

                                                   36
E.1    Optimal Control for the Relaxed Objective
We begin with the simplest variation of the problem, where we assume µ⋆ is known to the controller
and we wish to minimize the relaxed objective
                                       Z T                    Z T         
                      ′            −1         u    ⋆ 2                  2
                     JT (u) = E T ·         ∥θt − µ ∥ dt + λ ·     ∥ut ∥ dt .                (11)
                                                     0                              0

While we actually want to minimize the JT (u) defined in (10), which we will do in the sequel, but
observe that (i) JT (u) ≤ JT′ (u) for all u by Jensen’s inequality and (ii) minimizing JT′ (u) leads to
a more analytically tractable problem.
   Recall that θtu evolves according to the SDE (1),

                                   dθtu = [A (µ⋆ − θtu ) + ut ] dt + Σ1/2 dWt .

We claim the following result.

Theorem 6. Suppose that θtu evolves according to (1) for some progressively measurable ut . Then
the optimal control ut that minimizes the relaxed objective JT′ (u) defined in (11) is given by

                Pt (µ⋆ − θtu )
         ut =                  ,   where     Ṗt = A⊤ Pt + Pt A + λ−1 Pt2 − T −1 I,                and   PT = 0.   (12)
                     λ
In the special case that A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is diagonal, we have that
                                                  √ 2
                                      1 − e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                         1
               1
     ui (t) =     · q               q                             √                 (µ⋆i − θi (t)) .
              λT        2
                       α + /λT + α +
                           1                        2
                                                 α + /λT − α e
                                                        1           −2 α2i +1/λT (T −t)
                           i             i                   i            i


Proof. The proof proceeds by first centering the dynamics and then applying the standard Riccati
equation given in Theorem 4 to solve for the optimal control. Indeed, let

                          xt = θtu − µ⋆ ,     so dxt = [−Axt + ut ] dt + Σ1/2 dWt .                                (13)

We can then rewrite JT′ (u) as
                                                    Z T                    Z T                
                                                 1                 2                     2
                               JT′ (u) = E                   ∥xt ∥ dt + λ         ∥ut ∥ dt .
                                                 T       0                    0

Now, writing

                                        Q = T −1 · I and R = λ · I,

we can again rewrite JT′ (u) as
                                                 Z T                                   
                                   JT′ (u) = E                   x⊤        ⊤
                                                                  t Qxt + ut Rut        dt ,
                                                         0

We now observe that combining (13) with the above expression for JT′ (u), we have reduced the
problem of minimizing JT′ (u) to a standard linear-quadratic-Gaussian (LQG) control problem as in
Theorem 4. Applying the Riccati equation from Theorem 4 yields the desired result, in particular
the case found in Corollary 1.


                                                                  37
   For the special case, we use Lemma 1. Indeed, setting
                            r = λ,          q = T −1 ,   qf = 0,            and a = −αi ,
that result tells us that we can solve the scalar Riccati equation to get
                                    q                        √ 2           
                                      αi2 + 1/λT − αi 1 − e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                                       1
                                  λ
                       pi (t) = −          √ 2              √                   .
                                              α +1/λT −αi −2 α2 +1/λT (T −t)
                                       1 + √ i2 1        e    i
                                                    αi + /λT +αi

Thus,
                                      (i)
               ui (t) = −λ−1 pi (t)xt
                        q                              √ 2           
                           αi2 + 1/λT − αi 1 − e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                              1
                                                                                   (i)
                      =           √ 2                √                     (µ⋆i − θt )
                                    αi +1/λT −αi −2 α2 +1/λT (T −t)
                            1+ √ 2 1             e      i
                                    αi + /λT +αi
                                                           √ 2
                                                   1 − e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                                1
                         1
                      =    ·q                        q                        √ 2        .
                        λT      α2 + 1/λT + α +          α2 + 1/λT − α e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                                                       1
                                  i                 i              i                 i

The result follows.

   We now construct an approximation to the above optimal control where we assume that t ≪ T .
Indeed, we suppose that
                                                 1          1
                                       T −t≫ q           ≥      ,
                                            2 αi2 + 1/λT   2α i

                              √ 2
so that we can approximate e−2 αi + /λT (T −t) ≈ 0. Then we have that
                                   1


                                                    1        1
                                       ui (t) ≈       ·q              ,
                                                   λT   α2 + 1/λT + α
                                                               i                 i

which is the form of the control used in our proposed algorithm.

E.2     Optimal Algorithm for the Original Objective
We now continue by considering the simplified setting where the controller is aware of the true
minimizer µ⋆ , but where we wish to minimize the original objective JT (u) defined in (10) rather
than the relaxed objective JT′ (u) defined in (11).
Theorem 7. Suppose that θtu evolves according to (1) for some progressively measurable ut . Then
the optimal control ut that minimizes the original objective JT (u) defined in (10) is given by
                                                       Z t             
                            ⋆    −1        ⋆                  ⋆
                           ut = λ    Mt (µ − θt ) + Nt      (µ − θs )ds ,
                                                                            0

where
                      −Ṁt = −A⊤ Mt − Mt A + Nt + N⊤    −1 2
                                                   t − λ Mt ,                            MT = 0,
                      −Ṅt = −A⊤ Nt + St − λ−1 Mt Nt ,                      NT = 0,
                                 −1
                      −Ṡt = −λ       N⊤
                                       t Nt ,       ST = T     −2
                                                                       I.


                                                          38
Moreover, in the special case that A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is diagonal, we have that for αi ̸= 0,
                                                                                                                                    !
                                    1 − e−αi (T −t)                                  1 − e−αi (T −t) ⋆
                                                                                                                  Z t
u⋆i (t) =                                                    −2α (T −t)
                                                                                                    (µ − θt ) +         (µ⋆ − θs ) ds
            αi λT 2 + (T −t)/αi − α22 · 1 − e−αi (T −t) + 1−e 2α2i                        αi
                                                       
                                                                                                                   0
                                     i                                     i
                                                                                                                          (14)

whereas for αi = 0, we have
                                                                                        Z t
                                  (T − t)2                       (T − t)
                    u⋆i (t) =              3   · (µ⋆ − θt ) +                ·                (µ⋆ − θs ) ds.              (15)
                                  2
                                λT + (T −t) /3                λT + (T −t)3/3
                                                                2
                                                                                          0

Proof. We introduce the accumulated centered process
                                          Z t
                                    ytu =     (θsu − µ⋆ ) ds.
                                                          0

Then we observe that
                                                         Z T                  
                                   1
                        JT (u) = E    ∥yT ∥2 + λ                       2
                                                                  ∥ut ∥ dt ,       and dytu = xt dt.
                                   T2                         0

This is not quite in the form of an LQG problem, but suppose that we augment the state to be
ztu = (xut , ytu ). Then we have that
                                                                        1/2 
        u                                         −A 0            I         Σ
     dzt = (Fzt + Gut ) dt + EdWt , where F =             , G=       , E=          .
                                                   I   0          0           0

We then may take Q to be zero and
                                                         
                                                  0   0
                                             Qf =           ,              R = λI.
                                                  0 T −2 I

This then again becomes an LQG problem, and we can apply the Riccati equation from Theorem 4
to solve for the optimal control. Indeed, the Riccati equation in this case is given by

                          −Ṗt = F⊤ Pt + Pt F − λ−1 Pt GG⊤ Pt ,                    and PT = Qf .

Writing
                                                            
                                                       Mt Nt
                                                  Pt =         ,                                                          (16)
                                                       N⊤
                                                        t St

we get that

                                              u⋆t = −λ−1 (Mt xt + Nt yt )

or, alternatively
                                                                Z t             
                                 u⋆t = −λ−1              ⋆
                                               Mt (θt − µ ) + Nt            ⋆
                                                                     (θs − µ ) ds ,                                       (17)
                                                                               0




                                                                  39
where

                    −Ṁt = −A⊤ Mt − Mt A + Nt + N⊤    −1 2
                                                 t − λ Mt ,                             MT = 0,
                                    ⊤                −1
                    −Ṅt = −A Nt + St − λ                 Mt Nt ,      NT = 0,                           (18)
                     −Ṡt = −λ−1 N⊤
                                  t Nt ,         ST = T −2 I

is derived by plugging in the decomposition in (16) into the Riccati equation in (9) and rearranging.
The first result follows.
    For the special case that A is diagonal, the coordinates decouple and we derive the solution in
Lemma 3.

Lemma 3. Suppose that A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is diagonal. Then the above system of ODEs for Mt ,
Nt , and St decouples into d independent systems of ODEs, one for each coordinate. In particular,
for each i ∈ [d], we have that (18) decouples and can be solved to yield a closed-form solution for
u⋆i (t), given in (14) and (15).
Proof. In the case where A is diagonal, it is immediate that the system decouples into d independent
systems of ODEs, one for each coordinate because now every matrix is diagonal (note that Σ may
be taken to be diagonal without loss of generality by the rotational invariance of Brownian motion).
Thus, we can solve for each coordinate separately.
    In particular, we know that the optimal controller is given by (17), i.e. for the ith coordinate,
                                                         Z t              
                         ⋆         −1        ⋆   (i)            ⋆    (i)
                        ui (t) = λ     Mt (µi − θt ) + Nt     (µi − θs )ds ,
                                                                        0

where Mt and Nt solve the system of ODEs from (18) in the scalar setting, i.e.

                              −Ṁt = −2αi Mt + 2Nt − λ−1 Mt2 ,                 MT = 0,
                               −Ṅt = −αi Nt + St − λ−1 Mt Nt ,                NT = 0,                   (19)
                                                               −1                     −2
                                                −Ṡt = −λ           Nt2 ,    ST = T        .

Note that we are now in the scalar setting, so we are not bolding the variables; for notational
simplicity, we omit the subscript i in the remainder of this proof. Now, let τ = T − t be the time
to go and define the following functions:
                                                    ( −ατ
                                      Z τ            1−e
                                                            , α ̸= 0,
                              h(τ ) =     e−αs ds =     α
                                       0             τ,        α = 0,
and
                                                               −ατ )
                                                (                          −2ατ
                                                        − 2(1−e
                              Z τ                    τ
                                        2           α2       2α3
                                                                     + 1−e2α3 ,                α ̸= 0,
                    g(τ ) =         h(s) ds =       τ3
                               0                    3 ,                                        α = 0.
We claim that the solution to the above system of ODEs is given by
                               h(τ )2                      h(τ )                         1
                     Mt =                 ,   Nt =                   ,       St =                 .      (20)
                            T 2 + g(τ )/λ              T 2 + g(τ )/λ                T 2 + g(τ )/λ
Let D(τ ) = T 2 + g(τ )/λ. We verify that the above is indeed a solution by plugging into the ODEs.
First, we have that

              h′ (τ ) = e−ατ = 1 − αh(τ ),       g ′ (τ ) = h(τ )2 ,        and D′ (τ ) = λ−1 h(τ )2 .


                                                          40
Observing that d/dτ = −d/dt, can plug in (20) into (19) to observe that this is indeed the solution.
   Thus, plugging back in, we see that the optimal control is given by
                                                                Z t             
                  ⋆         h(T − t)                   ⋆               ⋆
                u (t) =                  · h(T − t)(µ − θt ) +       (µ − θs ) ds .
                        λT 2 + g(T − t)                           0

In particular, for α = 0, we have that
                                                                                  Z t
                                (T − t)2                         (T − t)
                  u⋆ (t) =                    · (µ⋆ − θt ) +                  ·         (µ⋆ − θs ) ds.
                             λT 2 + (T −t)3/3                λT 2 + (T −t)3/3      0

For α ̸= 0, we have that
                                                                                                                           !
                                1 − e−α(T −t)                             1 − e−α(T −t) ⋆
                                                                                                         Z t
u⋆ (t) =                                                     −2α (T −t)
                                                                                       (µ − θt ) +             (µ⋆ − θs ) ds .
           αλT + (T −t)/α − α22 ·                       + 1−e 2α2i             α
                                                    
                                    1 − e−α(T −t)                                                         0
                                                                i


The result follows.

E.3    Generalizing to the Case Where µ⋆ is Unknown
The above results are a promising start but all rely on the assumption that µ⋆ is known to the
controller, which is certainly not the case in practice. Indeed, the entire goal of optimization is to
find µ⋆ ; thus, if the learner had access to µ⋆ from the start there would be no need to run any
optimization algorithm at all. In this section we show how to modify the above optimal controllers
to the case where µ⋆ is unknown, and in particular we show that the same form of controller is still
optimal, but with µ⋆ replaced by an estimate of µ⋆ .
    The key factor in generalizing to the case where µ⋆ is unknown is the separation principle from
control theory, which is also known as certainty equivalence [12, 20, 35]. This principle essentially
states that for an LQG control problem where the state is not directly observed, the optimal control
can be obtained by first estimating the state as the conditional expectation of the state given the
observations and then plugging this estimate into the optimal control for the fully observed case.
More formally, we have the following result.

Theorem 8. Consider an LQG problem as in (7) and (8) where the state xut is not directly observed,
but rather we have access to an observation process yt = ϕ(xut , µ⋆ ) for some unknown µ⋆ drawn from
a known prior distribution with ϕ invertible in the first argument. Suppose that the corresponding
full-information LQG problem where the state is directly observed has an optimal control given by
ut = Kt xt for some matrix K   t .−1Then the optimal control for the partially observed problem is given
                                          ⋆
                                                       
by ut = Kt x̂t , where x̂t = E ϕ (yt , µ ) | ys , s ≤ t is the conditional expectation of the state given
the observations.

Proof. This is a classical result in control theory, and we refer the reader to Georgiou and Lindquist
[12], Kwakernaak and Sivan [20], Van de Water and Willems [35] for a complete proof. In order to
translate those works to our setting, we may apply Georgiou and Lindquist [12, Theorem 14] to the
original control problem augmented with the state µt such that µ0 = µ⋆ and dµt = 0 for all t; the
observation process θt = µ⋆ +xt is then a linear function of the state, and the optimal control for the
fully observed problem is given by ut = Kt xt where Kt is the solution to the Riccati equation as in
Theorem 4. Applying Georgiou and Lindquist [12, Theorem 14] then yields the desired result.

   We thus have the following two corollaries, for the relaxed and original objectives respectively.


                                                            41
Corollary 3. Let JT′ (u) denote the relaxed objective in (11) and suppose that θtu evolves according
                                                  bt = E [µ⋆ | θsu , s ≤ t] be the conditional expectation
to (1) for some progressively measurable ut . Let µ
of µ given the trajectory of θt up to time t. Then the optimal control ut that minimizes JT′ (u) is
    ⋆                          u

given by

                                                             µt − θtu )
                                                         Pt (b
                                              u⋆ (t) =
                                                               λ
where Pt is the solution to the same Riccati equation as in (12). In the special case that A =
diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is diagonal, we have that
                                                   √
                                                 −2 α2i +1/λT (T −t)
                  1                       1 −  e
    u⋆i (t) =         · q                q                         √ 2            µi (t) − θi (t))
                                                                                     (b
                 λT         α2 + 1/λT + α +        α2 + 1/λT − α e−2 αi + /λT (T −t)
                                                                           1
                            i            i           i              i


for each i ∈ [d].

Proof. This follows immediately by combining Theorem 6 with Theorem 8.

    For the original objective, we have the following result.

Corollary 4. Let JT (u) denote the original objective in (10) and suppose that θtu evolves according
to (1) for some progressively measurable ut . Let µbt = E [µ⋆ | θsu , s ≤ t] be the conditional expectation
    ⋆                          u
of µ given the trajectory of θt up to time t. Then the optimal control ut that minimizes JT (u) is
given by
                                                                  Z t       
                         u⋆t = λ−1 Mt (bµ t − θt ) + N t t · µ
                                                             bt −       θs ds     ,
                                                                           0

where Mt , Nt , and St are the solutions to the same system of ODEs as in Theorem 7. In the special
case that A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) is diagonal, we have that for αi ̸= 0,
                                                                                                                       !
                         1 − e−αi (T −t)                     1 − e−αi (T −t)                           Z t
                                                                                         (i)
u⋆i (t) =                                                                     µbi (t) − θt + t · µ
                                                                                                 bi (t) −     θs(i) ds
          αi λT 2 + (T −t)/αi − 2α3 2 · 1 − e−αi (T −t)
                                                        
                                                                  αi                                       0
                                   i


whereas for αi = 0, we have
                                                                                         Z t
                          (T − t)2
                                                                                                 
                                         
                                                     (i)
                                                              (T − t)
           u⋆i (t) =                    · µbi (t) − θt +                    · t·µ
                                                                                bi (t) −      (i)
                                                                                             θs ds .
                       λT 2 + (T −t)3/3                    λT 2 + (T −t)3/3               0

Proof. This follows immediately by combining Theorem 7 with Theorem 8.

    Thus, at least in theory, we have a complete answer to the question of how to control optimization
algorithms in order to minimize the mean squared error of the returned iterate average as an
estimator of µ⋆ . Unfortunately, the above optimal controllers are not implementable in practice
because they require computing µ   bt = E [µ⋆ | θsu , s ≤ t], even in the simplified diagonal setting where
the coordinates decouple. In the following subsection, we show how to derive a practical algorithm
by approximating µ  bt with a simple estimator of µ⋆ that can be computed from the trajectory of θtu
up to time t.




                                                            42
E.4     Deriving a Practical Algorithm through Approximation
As remarked above, the optimal controllers derived in the previous subsections are not imple-
mentable in practice. For the general setting, solving the Riccati equations is already highly non-
trivial in high dimensions and certainly beyond reach at the scale of language models. Even in
                                                                bt = E [µ⋆ | θsu , s ≤ t], which is not
the diagonal setting, the optimal controllers require computing µ
computable in closed form and would require solving a high-dimensional integral at every time step.
Moreover, the updates themselves are quite complicated. We thus propose three simplifications:

    1. We will consider only the diagonal setting, where the coordinates decouple and we can solve
       for the optimal controller in closed form.
                                     Rt
    2. We will approximate µ bt = 1t 0 θsu ds, which is a natural estimator of µ⋆ given the trajectory
       of θtu up to time t.

    3. We will approximate the optimal controller by its form when t ≪ T , which is the regime we
       are in for most of the optimization trajectory.

The first approximation allows for the closed-form solution to the optimal controller, which we
derived above. The second approximation is a natural one, as µ  bt becomes simple to estimate and
is naturally aligned with the core motivation of this work: using iterate averaging to get better
estimates of µ⋆ . The third approximation is also natural and can be used to greatly simplify the
form of the optimal controller. In particular we will make the following approximations:

                                   T −t≈T          and e−αi (T −t) ≈ 0,

where the second of these relies on the assumption that T −t ≫ √ 21 1                 . Critically, by replacing µ
                                                                                                                 bt
                                                                       2   αi + /λT
with the iterate average, the second term in Corollary 4 drops out, which is a significant simplification
and makes the resulting controller much more practical to implement.
   With these approximations, we have that the optimal controller in Corollary 4 is approximated
by
                                                 1
                                u⋆i (t) =                   µi (t) − θi (t)) ,
                                                          (b
                                            T 1 + λαi2 T

which is a simple and practical controller that can be empirically implemented. In particular, we
can write the above in vector form as
                                          1             −1
                               u⋆ (t) =     · I + λA2 T      µ(t) − θ(t)) .
                                                            (b
                                          T
This is the form of the controller used in our proposed algorithm, albeit with a discrete time
approximation and additional simplifications.


F     Proofs of Convergence Results
In this section we provide rigorous proofs of the convergence results stated in Section 2. We begin
with a proof of Theorem 3 in Section F.1, before proceeding to prove our two propositions about
the improvement over SGD in the quadratic setting in Sections F.2 and F.3.




                                                      43
F.1    Proof of Theorem 3
We now prove that the update strategy given in (5) converges to the minimum of F when F is
convex. In particular, we instantiate the update with a diagonal C and a fixed EMA parameter β.
More precisely, we suppose

                   C = diag(c1 , . . . , cd ),    where 0 ≤ ci ≤ 1,        and β ∈ (0, 1).             (21)

We denote by cmin = min1≤i≤d ci the smallest diagonal entry of C. We will further make the
following assumptions about the objective F and the stochastic gradients gk :

Assumption F.1. The objective F : Rd → R is convex and G-Lipschitz with minimum µ⋆ .

Assumption
        h    F.2. At anyiiteration k, the gradient estimate gk ∈ Rd satisfies Ek−1 [gk ] = ∇F (θk )
and Ek−1 ∥gk − ∇F (θk )∥2 ≤ σ 2 for some σ > 0, where Ek [·] denotes expectation conditional on
the filtration generated by θj , gj for j ≤ k. We denote V 2 = G2 + σ 2 .

    Recall that given parameter θk , EMA parameter θbEMA,k , and stochastic gradient gk , for learning
rate ηk we update
                                         
     θk+1 = θk − ηk · gk + C θbEMA,k − θk    and θbEMA,k+1 = (1 − β) · θbEMA,k + β · θk+1 .       (22)

   We now prove a more general result for arbitrary non-increasing learning rate schedules from
which Theorem 3 will follow.

Theorem 9. Suppose that Assumptions F.1 and F.2 hold and that θk is updated as in (22) for some
non-increasing sequence {ηk }∞
                             k=0 . Furthermore, suppose that C and β are as in (21). Let
                                                        PT
                                                         k=1   ηk · θ k
                                                 θT =    P T
                                                             k=1 ηk

denote the average. Let
                                                                                           ci
            2
           DC = · (θ1 − µ⋆ )⊤ (I + 1−β/β · C) (θ1 − µ⋆ )           and    KC = max                 .   (23)
                                                                               1≤i≤d β + (1 − β)ci

If V is as in Assumption F.2, then
                                                                 P
                                           2 + V 2 + 2G(1−β)KC V
                                          DC                      · Tk=1 ηk2
                                    ⋆
                                                    β+(1−β)cmin
                     E F (θT ) − F (µ ) ≤                                    .
                                                    2 · Tk=1 ηk
                                                       P

Proof. We introduce the notation

                                                 rk = θk − θbEMA,k .

From (22), we have

                                   θk+1 = θbEMA,k + (I − C) rk − ηk · gk .

On the other hand, by the definition of the EMA update, we have

                             θbEMA,k+1 = θbEMA,k + β ((I − C)rk − ηk · gk ) .


                                                         44
Combining the preceding two displays, we have

                                    rk+1 = (1 − β) ((I − C) rk − ηk · gk ) .                                    (24)

We now introduce the notation2

                                            B = β · I + (1 − β) · C.

Now, letting

                                        xk = θbEMA,k + βB−1 (I − C)rk ,                                         (25)

we claim that

                                           xk+1 = xk − βηk · B−1 gk .

To see this, note that

                  xk+1 = θbEMA,k+1 + βB−1 (I − C)rk+1
                       = θbEMA,k + β · I + (1 − β)βB−1 (I − C) ((I − C)rk − ηk · gk )
                                                              

                         = θbEMA,k + β · B−1 (I − C)rk − βηk · B−1 gk
                         = xk − βηk · B−1 gk .

       We now claim that
                                            h          i
                                          Ek gk⊤ B−1 gk ≤ β −1 · V 2 .                                          (26)

To see this, note first that because C is diagonal, it holds that B−1 is diagonal with entries
                                                         1
                                        0 ≤ bi =                 ≤ β −1 .
                                                   β + (1 − β)ci
Thus it holds that

                                            gk⊤ B−1 gk ≤ β −1 ∥gk ∥2 .

Thus, (26) then follows by Assumption F.2.
   We now use the convexity of F to bound control the instantatneous suboptimality of θk by a
function of xk . First, note that

                            I − βB−1 (I − C) = (βI + (1 − β)C)−1 C = B−1 C.

Thus,

                                  I − βB−1 (I − C) op = B−1 C op = KC .                                         (27)

Now, using (25), we see that

               ⟨∇F (θk ), xk − µ⋆ ⟩ = ⟨∇F (θk ), θk − µ⋆ ⟩ − ∇F (θk ), I − βB−1 (I − C)rk
                                                                                                   

                                    ≥ F (θk ) − F (µ⋆ ) − ∇F (θk ), I − βB−1 (I − C)rk
                                                                                       

                                    ≥ F (θk ) − F (µ⋆ ) − GKC ∥rk ∥ ,
   2
    This will never be confused with the B in the definition of LQG control problems in (7), as this notation is only
used in this section.


                                                         45
where the first inequality follows from convexity of F and the second inequality follows from Cauchy-
Schwarz coupled with the G-Lipschitzness of F and (27).
    Now, expanding the square, we see that
   h                                  i      h                            ⊤                          i
Ek β −1 (xk+1 − µ⋆ )⊤ B (xk+1 − µ⋆ ) = Ek β −1 xk − µ⋆ − βηk · B−1 gk B xk − µ⋆ − βηk · B−1 gk
                                            = β −1 (xk − µ⋆ )⊤ B (xk − µ⋆ )
                                                                                      h           i
                                              − 2ηk · ⟨∇F (θk ), xk − µ⋆ ⟩ + βηk2 · Ek gk⊤ B−1 gk
                                            ≤ β −1 (xk − µ⋆ )⊤ B (xk − µ⋆ )
                                              − 2ηk · ⟨∇F (θk ), xk − µ⋆ ⟩ + βηk2 · V 2 .
Plugging this into the preceding display and rearranging, we see that
                                h                             i   h                                 i
 2ηk · E [F (θk ) − F (µ⋆ )] ≤ E β −1 (xk − µ⋆ )⊤ B (xk − µ⋆ ) − E β −1 (xk+1 − µ⋆ )⊤ B (xk+1 − µ⋆ )
                                + 2ηk GKC · E [∥rk ∥] + V 2 · ηk2 .
Now, summing over k and telescoping, we see that
                   T                                          h                         i
                         ηk · E [F (θk ) − F (µ⋆ )] ≤ β −1 · E (x1 − µ⋆ )⊤ B (x1 − µ⋆ )
                   X
              2·
                   k=1
                                                              T
                                                              X                    T
                                                                                   X
                                                    +V2·            ηk2 + 2GKC ·         ηk · E [∥rk ∥] .
                                                              k=1                  k=1

Because θ1 = θbEMA,1 we know that r1 = 0 and thus x1 = θ1 . Thus the first term on the right hand
side can be bounded by DC 2 by the definition of D 2 in (23). For the left hand side, observe that by
                                                    C
convexity of F we have that
                     T                                  T
                                                            !
                   X                                    X
                       ηk · E [F (θk ) − F (µ⋆ )] ≥ 2 ·   ηk · E F (θT ) − F (µ⋆ ) .
                                                                                 
                2·
                     k=1                                      k=1
Thus, all that remains is to bound the final term on the right hand side. Applying the convexity of
the norm to (24), we have that
                          ∥rk+1 ∥ ≤ (1 − β) · ∥I − C∥op · ∥rk ∥ + (1 − β) · ηk · ∥gk ∥ .
By the construction of C, we know that ∥I − C∥op = 1 − cmin . Thus,
                         E [∥rk+1 ∥] ≤ (1 − β)(1 − cmin ) · E [∥rk ∥] + (1 − β) · ηk · V.
By induction, it thus holds that
                                                   k−1
                                                   X
                           E {∥rk ∥} ≤ (1 − β)V          ((1 − β)(1 − cmin ))j · ηk−1−j .
                                                   j=0

Summing, and using the fact that ηk is non-increasing, we then have that
                   T
                   X                                    T
                                                        X −1 X
                                                             k−2
                          ηk · E [∥rk ∥] ≤ (1 − β)V ·               2
                                                                   ηk−1−j ((1 − β)(1 − cmin ))j
                   k=1                                  k=1 j=0
                                                                         T
                                                 (1 − β)V           X
                                       ≤                          ·   ηk2 .
                                           1 − (1 − β)(1 − cmin )
                                                                        k=1
The result concludes by plugging this into the preceding display and rearranging.

                                                         46
    We now prove Theorem 3 as a corollary of Theorem 9.
    We do this by stating a more explicit convergence guarantee for the special case of a fixed
learning rate.

Corollary 5. Suppose that Assumptions F.1 and F.2 hold and θk is updated as in (22) for ηk =
T −1/2 · η for some fixed η. Then,
                                                       T
                                                 1X
                                            θT =    θk
                                                 T
                                                       k=1

and
                                                                         
                                              D 2 + η 2 V 2 + 2G(1−β)KC V
                                                C             β+(1−β)cmin
                        E F (θT ) − F (µ⋆ ) ≤
                                          
                                                            √               .
                                                         2η T
In particular, for the optimal choice of η,
                                         q
                                             2G(1−β)KC V   √
                              ⋆
                                  DC V 2 + β+(1−β)cmin      2 − β ∥θ1 − µ⋆ ∥ V
               E F (θT ) − F (µ ) ≤         √            ≤        ·    √
                                              T               β          T

Proof. The first statement on θT is immediate from the definition. The final inequaltiy for the
tuned bound follows from the fact that
                            ∥θ1 − µ⋆ ∥
                     DC ≤      √       ,   KC ≤ 1,     and β + (1 − β)cmin ≥ β.
                                 β
The main bound for arbitrary fixed η then follows by plugging the fixed learning rate schedule into
Theorem 9.

   Note that Theorem 3 follows immediately from Corollary 5.

F.2    Proof of Proposition 2
We now consider the special case of a diagonal quadratic objective, where we can obtain a more
explicit convergence guarantee. Suppose that
                 1
          F (θ) = (θ − µ⋆ )⊤ A(θ − µ⋆ ),     where A = diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) with αi > 0.           (28)
                 2
Suppose that at each iteration we have access to a stochastic gradient of the form

         gk = A(θk − µ⋆ ) + ξk ,                              Cov (ξk ) = diag σ12 , . . . , σd2 .
                                                                                                
                                   where E [ξk ] = 0 and                                             (29)

    We will consider the update in (22) for an arbitrary diagonal C with nonnegative entries and
a fixed EMA parameter β and learning rate η. We make the following assumption on the learning
rate, which is standard in the analysis of stochastic optimization algorithms for quadratic objectives
[42] and ensures that the algorithm is stable.

Assumption F.3. We assume that the learning rate η satisfies 0 < ηαi < 1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ d.

   Note that in the special case the C = 0, we recover the dynamics of an EMA on SGD precisely.


                                                  47
Proposition 5. Suppose that F is as in (28) and gradient estimates gk are as in (29). Let θbT
denote the update at time T given by (22) for fixed η satisfying Assumption F.3. Let θbSGD evolve
            SGD = θ
such that θbk+1   bSGD − η · gk and let θbEMA,k+1 = (1 − β)θbEMA,k + βθk . Then there exists some C
                    k
such that
                                                                                   
                              2                           2                           2
                           ⋆                            ⋆                   SGD    ⋆
             lim E θT − µ
                      b           < lim E θEMA,T − µ
                                              b               < lim E θT − µ
                                                                           b              .
            T →∞                        T →∞                                   T →∞

Thus, in particular,
                            h        i       h            i       h           i
                       lim E F (θbT ) < lim E F (θbEMA,T ) < lim E F (θbTSGD ) .
                      T →∞                 T →∞                            T →∞

Proof. Note first that we may set µ⋆ = 0 without loss of generality; if µ⋆ ̸= 0, we can simply shift
the objective by µ⋆ to arrive at the same setting and the same convergence guarantee. Second, note
that the ultimate statement follows immediately from the penultimate statement by the definition
of F in (28). Third, note that due to the diagonal structure of the objective and C, the dynamics
of each coordinate are decoupled, and thus it suffices to prove the result for the one-dimensional
case. Thus, we will now assume that d = 1 and write α = α1 , σ 2 = σ12 , and c = c1 . For the sake of
notational convenience, let a = η · α. The update then becomes

                θk+1 = (1 − a − c)θk + cθbk 0 − ηξk          and θbk+1 = (1 − β)θbk + βθk+1 .      (30)

We may write θt as a function of θb through the second equation in (30) and, plugging this into the
first equation and rearranging, we get

                   θbk+1 = (2 − a − β − c(1 − β)) θbk − (1 − β) (1 − a − c)θbk−1 − βηξk .          (31)

We may rewrite (31) as an explicity AR(2) process with noise by observing that
          "       #                                           "       #        
            θbk+1     2 − a − β − c(1 − β) −(1 − β)(1 − a − c)      θbk     −βηξk
                   =                                                     +          .
              θbk               1                    0            θbk−1        0

An elementary shows that the eigenvalues of the transition matrix at c = 0 are 1−β hand 1−a,i which
are both in the unit disk for sufficiently small c by continuity. Letting γj (c) = E θk θk−j denote
                                                                                     b  b
the autocovariance of the process, the Yule-Walker equations for this AR(2) process Theorem 5 are
given by

              γ1 (c) = (2 − a − β − c(1 − β)) γ0 (c) − (1 − β) (1 − a − c)γ1 (c)
              γ2 (c) = (2 − a − β − c(1 − β)) γ1 (c) − (1 − β) (1 − a − c)γ0 (c)
              γ0 (c) = (2 − a − β − c(1 − β)) γ1 (c) − (1 − β) (1 − a − c)γ2 (c) + β 2 η 2 σ 2 .

Solving for γ0 (c) yields

                                         βη 2 σ 2 (2 − a − β + aβ − c(1 − β))
                   γ0 (c) =                                                            .           (32)
                              a (a + β − aβ + c(1 − β)) (4 − 2a − 2β + aβ − 2c(1 − β))
By Lemma 2, it holds that
                                                                  
                                                               2
                                        lim E       θbT − µ⋆           = γ0 (c).
                                       T →∞



                                                        48
Taking the derivative of γ0 (c) with respect to c at c = 0, we see that

                        2β(1 − β)η 2 σ 2       (1 − β)2 (1 − a)2 + (1 − β)(2 − a) + (1 − a)
                                                                                           
            γ0′ (0) = −                                                                      < 0.
                                              a(2 − a)2 (2 − β)2 (a + β − aβ)2

Thus it holds that for sufficiently small c > 0,
                                                                               
                                     2                                          2
                                  ⋆                                           ⋆
                 lim E θT − µ
                           b             = γ0 (c) < γ0 (0) = lim E θEMA,T − µ
                                                                    b               .
                 T →∞                                                            T →∞

On the other hand, because
                                                SGD
                                              θbk+1 = (1 − a)θbkSGD − ηξk ,

it holds that
                                                                       η2σ2          η2σ2
                                                           
                                                        2
                        lim E       θbTSGD − µ⋆                 =                =          > γ0 (0),
                       T →∞                                         1 − (1 − a)2   a(2 − a)

where the inequality follows immediately from an elementary computation.

F.3    Proof of Proposition 3
We now further specialize applying (5) to the problem outlined (28) and (29) in the setting where
C = I. We state a more explicit convergence guarantee in this setting, which will allow us to show
that the improvement over EMA on SGD can be arbitrarily large.

Proposition 6. Suppose that F is as in (28) and gradient estimates gk are as in (29). Let A =
diag(α1 , . . . , αd ) let η, β such that

                                                            β < η · αi < 1/8

for all 1 ≤ i ≤ d. Let θbT denote the update at time T given by (22) for C = I and fixed η. Let θbSGD
                   SGD = θ
evolve such that θbk+1     bSGD − η · gk and let θbEMA,k+1 = (1 − β)θbEMA,k + βθk . Then
                            k
                                                                                                           2
                                                2                                          
                                    θbT − µ⋆
                                                                                     1/2
                       lim E                            ≤ 8 lim η · E            A             θbTSGD − µ⋆          .
                       T →∞                                     T →∞

Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 5, we may reduce to a one-dimensional setting, writing α = α1 ,
σ 2 = σ12 , and a = ηα. Observe that for c = 1, the coefficients are

                                       ϕ1 = 1 − a and ϕ2 = a(1 − β).

Thus, in this setting, by (32), it holds that

                                                                              βη 2 σ 2 (1 − a + aβ)
                                         
                                        2
                                      ⋆
                     lim E θT − µ
                              b             = γ0 (1) =                                               ,
                       T →∞                                               a(1 + a − aβ)(2 − 2a + aβ)

whereas
                                                                               βη 2 σ 2 (2 − a − β + aβ)
                                                  
                                               2
                                          ⋆
                lim E       θbEMA,T − µ                = γ0 (0) =                                         .
                T →∞                                                      a(a + β − aβ)(4 − 2a − 2β + aβ)


                                                                     49
Thus,
                                             
                                          2
              limT →∞ E        θbT − µ⋆
                                          (2 − a)(2 − β)(a + β − aβ)(1 − a + aβ)
                                    =
                                   2    (1 + a − aβ)(2 − 2a + aβ)(2 − a − β + aβ)
            limT →∞ E θbEMA,T − µ⋆
                                                                        8a
                                                  ≤
                                                    (1 + a − aβ)(2 − 2a + aβ)(2 − a − β + aβ)
                                                  ≤ 8a,

where in the first inequality we used the fact that

            2 − a ≤ 2,     2 − β ≤ 2,         a + β − aβ ≤ a + β ≤ 2a,   and 1 − a + aβ ≤ 1.

In the second inequality, we used the fact that

                           1 + a − aβ ≥ 1 and 2 − 2a + aβ ≥ 2 − 2a ≥ 1.

The result then follows.

   The proof of Proposition 3 then follows immediately from the preceding proposition.




                                                        50
